BusinessTechThe National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) has reported 16,055 new Covid-19 cases in South Africa, taking the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases to 3,004,203.This increase represents a 24.3% positivity rate, it said.As per the National Department of Health, a further 25 Covid-19 related deaths have been reported, taking total fatalities to 89,944 to date.The majority of new cases are from Gauteng (72%). Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal each accounted for 6% and the North West 5%.#COVID19 UPDATE: A total of 65,990 tests were conducted in the last 24hrs, with 16,055 new cases, which represents a 24.3% positivity rate. A further 25 #COVID19 related deaths have been reported, bringing total fatalities to 89,994 to date. See more here: https://t.co/PzzZEUQzNl pic.twitter.com/1qn1apRkri— NICD (@nicd_sa) December 3, 2021The fourth wave has sparked an increase in hospital admissions in children under the age of five, the NICD said.In a briefing led by health minister, Dr Joe Phaahla, the NICD’s Dr Waasila Jassat said there has been a rise in children who are in hospital for Covid-19 in both the public and private sectors.While most hospital admissions were initially recorded in Tshwane, Jassat said there are now starting to see an increase in other Gauteng districts as well.“The week on week in cases and admissions is higher than we’ve seen it before,” she told the media.While children may have not been “heavily” affected by the Covid-19 pandemic in the past with fewer admissions, recent data shows a different story during the current resurgence that is driven by the new Omicron variant.According to Jassat, who leads the NICD’s hospital surveillance for Covid-19, during the third wave, there have been more admissions in young children under five and teenagers from 15 to 19.“And now at the start of the fourth wave, we’ve seen quite a sharp increase across all age groups, but particularly in the under-five. The trend that we see now is different to what we saw before.”While the numbers may still be slightly lower in children, she said the hospital admissions for those under five are now second-highest and second only to the incidence in those over 60.“Just anecdotally, a paediatrician in a Tshwane hospital shared with us that all the children that were admitted from 12 to 18 years old were not vaccinated even though they were eligible. And that the younger children less than 12 who are not eligible for vaccination, none of the parents except for three were vaccinated.”Most patients who landed in hospital during the first two weeks in the third wave were mostly elderly people between the ages of 50 and 60.“However, in the fourth wave, you can see most admissions on younger people less than 40 years and particularly stark differences in the zero to four age group where there were fewer admissions in the third wave in the early part of the fourth wave.”In Tshwane, Jassat said there are already over 100 admissions in children under the age of four in the first two weeks of the current wave.NICD head of the division of Public Health Surveillance and Response, Dr Michelle Groome, said that scientists are still waiting for additional data on the severity of the disease, while early evidence shows that this variant is more transmissible and that there is some degree of immune escape.“There is a possibility of people who have already been infected being reinfected,” she added.However, she believes that vaccination will prevent severe disease in people who may be infected even after receiving the jab.Read: Standard Bank introduces mandatory Covid-19 vaccine policyComments section policy:To continue, please click the box below to let us know you're not a robot.Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading. For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy.For inquiries related to this message please contact our support team and provide the reference ID below.

      Eyder Peralta
    
South Africa's health ministry says the rate of infection is the highest since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic.MARY LOUISE KELLY, HOST:  South Africa is now firmly in the grips of a fourth wave of COVID-19 that's being driven by the omicron variant. Every major city is seeing a rise in cases, and scientists say this is unprecedented. NPR's Eyder Peralta is in Cape Town, South Africa. He joins us now.Hey, Eyder.EYDER PERALTA, BYLINE: Hey, Mary Louise.KELLY: Tell me more about this fourth wave.PERALTA: So look, if you look at the curve right now, it shows a super steep spike in cases. And in terms of numbers, on November 16, the seven-day moving average of laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases was 332. That number is now 4,800. And scientists here are saying that that is unprecedented, that this is a much faster acceleration than we have seen in the previous three waves. And this is happening across the country, in every province, in every major city. And scientists here say that it is being driven by the omicron variant.KELLY: Do all of these new cases mean that there is more data? Are we learning more about the omicron variant?PERALTA: So it's early days, so we know very little. But we do know that this is a highly infectious variant. And a new paper that was just released that has not been peer reviewed shows that the variant is doing a good job at infecting people who have had COVID in the past. But the health minister here, Dr. Joe Phaahla, had some good news, that hospitalizations are rising but not at a huge level. Let's listen.JOE PHAAHLA: The infections are causing mostly mild illness, with hospital admissions mainly dominated by those who are not vaccinated and young people below the age of 40, most of whom are not vaccinated.PERALTA: So he made a point to say that the best way to fight this thing is to get vaccinated.KELLY: But hang on, can I circle back to something we just heard him say? Did he just say young people below the age of 40 are dominating hospital admissions? That seems very different from what we've seen in past waves.PERALTA: Yeah, and this started differently, too. I mean, it started spreading among young people, and health authorities here are looking closely at the demographics of hospitalizations. They found that in Gauteng province, kids below the age of 2 are being hospitalized at much higher levels than in previous waves. But they don't know why. Does it mean that kids are more susceptible to this virus? Or are doctors admitting healthy kids because they have enough beds? And, you know, we will get answers to these questions, but we don't have them yet.KELLY: I'm sure South Africa would rather not be making international headlines for being at the forefront of this. How are people there holding up? How are they reacting?PERALTA: I mean, look, so something funny - every time that a COVID wave picks up steam here, the government bans the sale of alcohol. And they do that basically because drunk people create problems, and they end up at the hospital. So if you ban alcohol, you clear ER beds for COVID patients. So when this new variant was announced, the first thing everyone did was joke that they were headed to the liquor store to stock up (laughter). And actually, there was a line here at liquor stores. But look, this is serious. We're headed into summer here, and everyone was looking forward to what was supposed to be the first normal summer in two years. And South Africa has had the most deaths of any sub-Saharan African country.It's a country whose economy was already suffering before this pandemic. So the hope was palpable. People thought they would get back to work, that tourists would come back, that lockdowns would be a thing of the past. And here we are, staring at a future that looks a lot like the past two years. South Africa is once again on red lists, ostracized from the rest of the world. And South Africans I've talked to just in my regular life are just sick of all of this, and some can't even fathom. They can't imagine how they're going to survive economically another COVID wave.KELLY: Wow. Yeah. I know a lot of people who hear that and sympathize.NPR's Eyder Peralta in Cape Town, thank you.PERALTA: Thank you, Mary Louise.Copyright © 2021 NPR.  All rights reserved.  Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.NPR thanks our sponsorsBecome an NPR sponsorOfficials say variant’s R number is believed to be above 6, though most cases are mild and no deaths reportedFirst published on Fri 3 Dec 2021 12.59 GMTThe pace of Covid infections in the South African province of Gauteng is outstripping anything seen in previous waves, and officials say Omicron is now the dominant variant.Angelique Coetzee, the chair of the South African Medical Association, said Omicron’s R number, measuring its ability to spread, was believed to be above 6. The R number for Delta, the dominant variant globally, is estimated to be above 5.Speaking to the BBC’s PM programme, Coetzee said: “We know currently that the virus is transmissible. According to the scientists, the R value is 6.3, I think.”The chief scientist at the World Health Organization (WHO) urged people not to panic, saying it was impossible to predict whether Omicron would become the dominant variant worldwide.Soumya Swaminathan said South Africa’s experience showed that Omicron “was highly transmissible”, but added: “How worried should we be? We need to be prepared and cautious, not panic, because we’re in a different situation to a year ago. Delta accounts for 99% of infections around the world. This variant would have to be more transmissible to outcompete and become dominant worldwide. It is possible, but it’s not possible to predict.”In Gauteng, a populous province that includes Johannesburg and is the centre of the outbreak, public health officials say case positivity rates have climbed from 2% in mid-November to 24% this week.However, most of the cases seen in the province so far, including by Coetzee, have been described as mild and are in younger patients, who make up a significantly greater proportion of the country’s unvaccinated.Prof Bruce Mellado, who advises the provincial government, told the Daily Maverick that health officials had seen such a rapid increase in cases in Gauteng over the past few weeks that they had had to recalibrate their projection models. The increase was at a rate not seen before, he said, not even in the third wave, which Mellado described as a “very serious situation”.Other officials in the province described a 20% rise in the seven-day rolling average of daily Covid cases, and increasing hospital admissions, driven by Omicron.First reported by South African scientists to the WHO on 24 November, Omicron has prompted some countries to shut their borders, reimpose travel restrictions and ramp up vaccination programmes.Among the concerns is whether Omicron might be infecting infants with more severe disease than previous variants, after a rise in admissions of under-fives to some hospitals.At a news conference on Friday, Waasila Jassat, of the National Institute for Communicable Diseases, said: “We’ve seen quite a sharp increase [in hospitalisations] across all age groups, particularly in the under-fives. The incidence in those under-fives is now second highest, and second only to the incidence in those over 60.”However, the number of infant cases remains relatively small and it is unclear how many of those hospitalisations were due to Omicron.Despite a rise in virus-related hospital admissions in South Africa, deaths appear to be increasing at a lower rate than during the country’s third wave of Covid. This was underlined by a statement from the WHO on Friday saying it had yet to see any reports of deaths related to Omicron.Amid increasing evidence that current vaccines are likely to offer a high level of protection against serious disease from the variant, the chief executive of Germany’s BioNTech said it should be able to adapt its vaccine relatively quickly in response to Omicron.Uğur Şahin told the Reuters Next conference on Friday that vaccines should continue to provide protection against severe disease despite mutations. “This variant might be able to infect vaccinated people. We anticipate that infected people who have been vaccinated will still be protected against severe disease,” Şahin said.He said mutations in the virus meant it was more likely that annual vaccinations would become the norm, as is the case with seasonal flu, and that new vaccines would be needed, although it was not yet clear when.The WHO called on makers of Covid vaccines to gear up for the likelihood of needing to adjust their products to protect against Omicron.To continue, please click the box below to let us know you're not a robot.Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading. For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy.For inquiries related to this message please contact our support team and provide the reference ID below.JOHANNESBURG (AP) — Dr. Sikhulile Moyo was analyzing COVID-19 samples in his lab in Botswana last week when he noticed they looked startlingly different from others. Within days, the world was ablaze with the news  that the coronavirus had a new variant of concern — one that appears to be driving a dramatic surge in South Africa and offering a glimpse of where the pandemic  might be headed.New COVID-19 cases in South Africa have burgeoned from about 200 a day in mid-November to more than 16,000 on Friday. Omicron was detected over a week ago in the country’s most populous province, Gauteng, and has since spread to all eight other provinces, Health Minister Joe Phaahla said.Even with the rapid increase, infections are still below the 25,000 new daily cases that South Africa reported in the previous surge, in June and July.Little is known about the new variant, but the spike in South Africa suggests it might be more contagious, said Moyo, the scientist who may have been the first to identify the new variant, though researchers in neighboring South Africa were close on his heels. Omicron has more than 50 mutations, and scientists have called it a big jump in the evolution of the virus.It’s not clear if the variant causes more serious illness or can evade the protection of vaccines. Phaahla noted that only a small number of people who have been vaccinated have gotten sick, mostly with mild cases, while the vast majority of those who have been hospitalized were not vaccinated.But in a worrisome development, South African scientists reported that omicron appears more likely than earlier variants to cause reinfections among people who have already had a bout with COVID-19.“Previous infection used to protect against delta, and now with omicron it doesn’t seem to be the case,” one of the researchers, Anne von Gottberg of the University of Witwatersrand, said at a World Health Organization briefing on Thursday.While the study did not examine the protection offered by vaccination, von Gottberg said: “We believe that vaccines will still, however, protect against severe disease.”The findings, posted online Thursday, are preliminary and haven’t yet undergone scientific review.South Africa’s hospitals are so far coping with the surge, even those in Gauteng province, which accounts for more than 70% of all new infections, Phaahla said.The picture could change because most of those infected thus far have been younger people, who generally do not get as sick as older patients. But Moyo expressed hope that vaccines would continue to work against the variant.“I have a lot of hope from the data that we see that those vaccinated should be able to have a lot of protection,” he said.That dovetails with what officials from WHO in Asia said Friday. While warning that cases could well rise quickly because of omicron, Dr. Takeshi Kasai, WHO regional director for the Western Pacific, said the measures used against the delta variant — which itself caused surges the world over — should remain at the core of the response.“The positive news in all of this is that none of the information we have currently about omicron suggests we need to change the directions of our response,” Kasai said.That means continuing to push for higher vaccination rates, abiding by social-distancing guidelines, and wearing masks, among other measures, said WHO Regional Emergency Director Dr. Babatunde Olowokure. While more than three dozen countries worldwide have reported omicron infections, the numbers so far are small outside of South Africa. That has led many countries to race to impose travel restrictions on visitors from southern Africa — a move WHO officials said may buy some time, though the agency previously urged against the closing of borders.The travel restrictions have been severely criticized by South Africa, which says it is being punished for being transparent and moving so quickly to alert the world to omicron. WHO said it was notified by the country on Nov. 24 about the new variant. “What we must reemphasize is that while our scientists and those in Botswana were the first to discover and report on the variant, no one knows where it originated,” Phaahla said.___Follow AP’s coverage of the coronavirus pandemic at https://apnews.com/hub/coronavirus-pandemicPlease select your experienceCopy/paste the script below

                                    OTHER WIDGETS
                                    

with AFPSouth Africa has enhanced its COVID-19 vaccination campaign by giving jabs at pop-up sites in shopping centers and transport hubs.This is aimed at preventing a rapid rise in new cases, a week after the discovery of the omicron variant in the country.According to statistics, National infections nearly doubled up to 8,561 Wednesday from 4,373 the previous day.Gauteng Province Premier, David Makhura said explained, "We are worried about the rapid rise in these numbers, and we want to deal with it as if we are in the fourth wave. Whether technically declared or not, that is how we are responding. Therefore, we are repurposing the beds; we are preparing the health system. We are going back to the things we have done during the, in the run up to the peak of the first wave, the second wave and the third wave. As you know, the third wave was much higher for us."Tests indicate the omicron variant is spreading rapidly and is now in five of South Africa's nine provinces.It is not known how many of the new cases are omicron because scientists can only do full genetic sequencing on a small number of the total positive cases.However, it appears that it is "rapidly becoming the dominant variant," according to a statement issued by the National Institute for Communicable Diseases which said that 74% of the 249 samples sequenced in November were identified as omicron.Gauteng Province, the country's economic hub is the hotspot for infections with more than 70% of the new cases.Officials say the province is increasing hospital beds and reopening some field hospitals in anticipation of an in increase in covid 19 patients."It's still early days (to determine if omicron variant carries bigger threat of serious illness and death), and I think we need to reserve judgment on that. Certainly, in this early stage, the news does look to be promising. The great majority of the breakthrough infection, in other words, individuals that have had an infection despite vaccination, is mild. Our hospital surveillance is showing a little bit of an uptick, but certainly nothing as dramatic as we've seen in the previous waves. ... Professor Barry Schoub, virologist and head of South Africa's ministerial advisory committee on COVID-19 said.This week alone, the province has recorded daily vaccinations of at least 50,000.However, authorities are concerned, about half of the province's 16 million people remain unvaccinated.This video can not be playedSouth Africa's president has condemned travel bans enacted against his country and its neighbours over the new coronavirus variant Omicron. Cyril Ramaphosa said he was "deeply disappointed" by the action, which he described as unjustified, and called for the bans to be urgently lifted. The UK, EU and US are among those who have imposed travel bans.Omicron has been classed as a "variant of concern". Early evidence suggests it has a higher re-infection risk.The heavily mutated variant was detected in South Africa earlier this month and then reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) last Wednesday.The variant is responsible for most of the infections found in South Africa's most populated province, Gauteng, over the last two weeks, and the number of cases of "appears to be increasing in almost all provinces" in the country, according to the WHO.South Africa reported 2,800 new infections on Sunday, a rise from the daily average of 500 in the previous week.Government adviser and epidemiologist Salim Abdool Karim said he expected the number of cases to reach more than 10,000 a day by the end of the week, and for hospitals to come under pressure in the next two to three weeks.  But Health Minister Joe Phaahla said there was "absolutely no need to panic"."We have been here before," he added, referring to the Beta variant identified in South Africa last December.On Monday, Japan became the latest country to reinstate tough border restrictions, banning all foreigners from entering the country from 30 November.The WHO has warned against countries hastily imposing travel curbs, saying they should look to a "risk-based and scientific approach". WHO's Africa director Matshidiso Moeti said on Sunday: "With the Omicron variant now detected in several regions of the world, putting in place travel bans that target Africa attacks global solidarity."However, numerous bans have been introduced in recent days, with Rwanda and Angola being among the African states to restrict flights to and from South Africa. Foreign ministry spokesman Clayson Monyela described their decision as "quite regrettable, very unfortunate, and I will even say sad".This video can not be playedIn his speech on Sunday, Mr Ramaphosa said there was no scientific basis for the travel bans and that southern Africa was the victim of unfair discrimination.He also argued that the bans would not be effective in preventing the spread of the variant."The only thing the prohibition on travel will do is to further damage the economies of the affected countries and undermine their ability to respond to, and recover from, the pandemic," he said.He called on countries with bans in place to "urgently reverse their decisions... before any further damage is done to our economies".Mr Ramaphosa said South Africa would not impose new restrictions, but would "undertake broad consultations on making vaccination mandatory for specific activities and locations". Current regulations in South Africa make it mandatory to wear face coverings in public, and restrict indoor gatherings to 750 people and outdoor gatherings to 2,000.There are no vaccine shortages in South Africa itself, and Mr Ramaphosa urged more people to get jabbed, saying that remained the best way to fight the virus.Health experts said that Gauteng, which includes Johannesburg, had entered a fourth wave, and most hospital admissions were of unvaccinated people. Omicron has now been detected in a number of countries around the world, including the UK, Germany, Australia and Israel.In other developments:Have your travel plans been affected by the bans? Share your experiences by emailing haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk.Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also get in touch in the following ways:If you are reading this page and can't see the form you will need to visit the mobile version of the BBC website to submit your question or comment or you can email us at HaveYourSay@bbc.co.uk. Please include your name, age and location with any submission. South Africa's president 'deeply disappointed'S Africa 'punished' for finding new Covid variantSouth Africans fear impact of new variant measuresHow worrying is the new Covid variant?One dead and dozens burned in Indonesia eruptionSchool shooting suspect's parents deny manslaughterEuropean envoys may return to Afghanistan - MacronReady for power: Team Scholz promises a new GermanyRos Atkins onâ¦ Americaâs abortion divide. VideoRos Atkins onâ¦ Americaâs abortion divideWhy Indian-born CEOs dominate Silicon Valley'I woke up in ICU... and didn't know what was real'Is low vaccination a factor in the rise of Omicron?Striking pictures from around the world this weekWhy Ugandan troops have entered DR Congo - againA race for equal rights: Formula 1 in Saudi ArabiaThe man who volunteered to be imprisoned in AuschwitzNightmare boss. Pointless tasks.Welcome to The OfficeA story of murder, drugs and gang warsThe extraordinary rise and fall of underworld boss Paul MasseyÂ© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.BusinessTechHere’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today:Coronavirus: In South Africa, there have been 4,373 new cases of Covid-19, taking the total reported to 2,968,052. Deaths have reached 89,843 (+21), while recoveries have climbed to 2,849,558, leaving the country with a balance of 28,651 active cases. The total number of vaccines administered is 25,619,891 (+171,124).Comments section policy:New data shows that the Omicron wave is much steeper than the Delta wave that hit South Africa - and hospitalisations are now rising in Gauteng province.
          Science and technology editor
              @aTomClarke
Thursday 2 December 2021 13:08, UKDon't be distracted by headlines saying the Omicron variant might be less deadly than Delta. More worrying pictures are starting to emerge from South Africa.And here's two of them.The first is data from the South African COVID-19 monitoring consortium on new cases.These graphs are showing a "sustained increase" (coloured orange) in cases in recent days in most of South Africa's provinces. Out in front is Gauteng province, home to Johannesburg and South Africa's capital, Pretoria.This is where the Omicron was first documented.I've been told that data being published later this week will show that nearly all this increase is likely due to cases of the Omicron variant.Like labs here in the UK, a PCR test for Omicron looks clearly different to the previously dominant Delta variant due to the "S-gene dropout". This is now the typical feature of cases in South Africa's fourth wave.
                  COVID-19: Rio cancels New Year's Eve celebrations amid spread of Omicron variant
                
                  South Africa sees rise in child COVID hospital admissions in Omicron epicentre but cases 'mild'
                
                  COVID: NHS allows GPs to postpone health checks for over-75s and new patients to focus on booster jabs
                What's really concerning in these charts is that the Omicron wave is much steeper than the Delta wave that hit South Africa in their winter (in the middle of each chart in red).Delta was by far the most transmissible variant of COVID seen so far. It also infected millions of South Africans. That, plus 24% of South Africans being vaccinated, should leave a majority of the population with some immunity to infection.Latest COVID updates as UK approves new drugFollow the Daily podcast on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, SpreakerSo what you would expect to see then - if a virus as transmissible as delta caused a second wave - is a much slower growth in infections, due to that herd immunity.But here in South Africa we don't. So either Omicron is much more transmissible than Delta or it's getting round antibodies from vaccination or previous infection. In all likelihood, due to its bevvy of mutations, the new variant is probably doing a bit of both.Now, this wouldn't be so awful if Omicron wasn't a very deadly virus. Quite a few experts have suggested this week that cases from Omicron seem to be mild. But there's a few problems with this. First, the population of South Africa and Botswana is much younger than Europe's. We know young people are more likely to get mild infections. Secondly, Omicron has only been around at noticeable levels for weeks. And it can take a fortnight for cases to end up in hospital.That's where the second picture comes in. Hospitalisations are now rising in Gauteng province. And given the rise in cases is being driven by Omicron, it's reasonable to assume these admissions are caused by it, too.There are some caveats here. New outbreaks of new variants when numbers of infections are low (as is the case at the start of this wave in South Africa) can start off very steeply and then slow down. Especially if they're confined to a particular group. The very steep Delta wave in unvaccinated parts of the north west of England was an example of this. It's also possible the hospitalisation curve will not rise as steeply as the curve in cases. That would be a reassuring sign.But so far there's nothing very reassuring about the data coming out of South Africa.
 © 2021 Sky UK
BusinessTechSouth African coronavirus cases are beginning to climb, the positivity rate of tests is increasing and an analysis of wastewater shows that the disease is once again becoming more prevalent in some areas.On 20 November, the number of confirmed cases over a 24-hour period rose to 887, the highest since 14 October, and on 21 November, 3.4% of tests returned a positive result, according to government data. If maintained over a seven-day period, that would be the highest proportion of people testing positive since the week ended 26 September.The rise in cases comes days after the National Institute for Communicable Diseases said that the incidence of Covid-19 was increasing in wastewater samples of some areas of Gauteng, the most populous province.South African Medical Research Council data show that excess deaths, the number of deaths over an historical average, have been rising in recent weeks.There has been a rise in the number of people testing positive in Gauteng, particularly in the Tshwane municipal area that includes the capital Pretoria, the NICD said in a later statement on Monday.“Localized increases in case numbers (clusters) are not unexpected,” Adrian Puren, the NICD’s acting executive director said in the statement. “However, it is hard to say whether the increases indicate the start of a widespread resurgence.”Scientists working with the government have predicted that a fourth wave of coronavirus infections could begin in December.Still, they said it will likely be less severe than previous resurgences because about a third of South African adults are fully vaccinated and between 60% and 70% of the population may have already been infected.The number of confirmed daily infections peaked at almost 20,000 in July, during the third and most severe wave the country has experienced.Return of patients South African hospitals are seeing a return of patients who don’t require treatment for Covid-19, though said a faster vaccination rate may be needed to ensure a fourth wave doesn’t lead to a large surge in admissions.Operators lead by Mediclinic International,  Life Healthcare, and Netcare are starting to work through a lengthy backlog of elective surgeries, the companies said during a recent round of earnings reporting.“In South Africa, the third wave was a big and tough one and lot of elective work wasn’t done,” Mediclinic chief executive Ronnie van der Merwe said in an interview.“That work will start flowing through and the first target is to get back to pre-pandemic levels of normality.”The country’s most recent Delta-driven surge was the most severe yet, though a major slump during September gave way to weeks of minimal case numbers.Positivity is now starting to pick up again, albeit off a low base, but only about 35% of adults are fully vaccinated. Inoculations have helped to reduce admissions in countries with more advanced rollout programs.“We are seeing a return to non-Covid activity. But how long will it last?” Netcare chief executive Richard Friedland said Monday. “We live under the spectre of another outbreak or flare-up until we’re in an endemic situation, not a pandemic.”Getting as many people vaccinated as soon as possible is imperative, he said, adding that South Africa remains short of adequate safety levels.Read: Regulator to consider use of Pfizer booster shots in South AfricaComments section policy:
                                            The first specimen of the new COVID-variant was collected over 2 weeks ago, but has only this week cause a stir after it was confirmed and reported to the World Health Organization on Wednesday.
                                        CAPE TOWN - South Africa has recorded another 2828 coronavirus cases over the last 24 hours.Sadly, 12 people died due to coronavirus related complications.There are now 19, 983 active cases in the country and our recovery rate remains at 96.3%.All eyes are on South Africa after local scientists discovered a new COVID variant named Omicron.The first specimen of the new COVID-variant was collected over 2 weeks ago, but has only this week cause a stir after it was confirmed and reported to the World Health Organization on Wednesday.The World Health Organization's Technical Advisory Group on Virus Evolution met on Friday, as scientists connect the dots between the discovery and a rise in infections.The Omicron variant has a number of mutations, the most significant being the chance of reinfection.Fortunately South African labs have confirmed that the common PCR test can act as marker around whether a patient has the variant.The World Health Organization said using this approach has in fact helped South Africa detect the variant at a much faster rate.The global body is now calling on all member states to up their surveillance efforts and publish their genome sequencing of the Omicron variant and all associated metadata.READ: WHO says COVID-19 strain discovered in SA is a “variant of concern”





BusinessTechStandard Bank South Africa says it has introduced a Covid-19 vaccination policy, which requires all employees of the group who work from the premises to be vaccinated against Covid-19.The policy will be implemented in South Africa in the first instance and will come into effect on 4 April 2022 in South Africa.This policy introduces the requirement for all employees who work on the group’s premises in South Africa to be vaccinated, but also allows for employees who have a valid reason for not being vaccinated to lodge a motivated objection to being vaccinated, it said.“We will make every reasonable attempt to accommodate employees who have valid reasons for not being vaccinated,” the financial group stressed.Sim Tshabalala, Standard Bank Group CEO, said: “Covid-19 vaccines have proven themselves globally. Large-scale, rigorous scientific studies have now shown conclusively – beyond any reasonable doubt – that the vaccines against Covid-19 approved by the World Health Organisation provide excellent protection against serious illness and death.“These vaccines are more effective than the immunity people get from having survived Covid-19 itself. Importantly, the vaccines also reduce the chances of spreading Covid-19 to others by 40% to 60% – depending on the specific vaccine and variant – which means that getting vaccinated helps a great deal to protect the people you care about.”The decision to adopt this approach has not been made lightly, the chief executive said.The bank said it took advice from its risk teams, medical experts and social scientists, and have carefully weighed up the scientific data as gathered by the World Health Organisation, the South African National Department of Health, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority, the South African National Institute for Communicable Diseases, and other leading African and international authorities.Standard Bank said it has also taken legal advice to ensure that people’s rights to bodily integrity and freedom of religion, belief and opinion are respected. “We have also discussed the rationale for our decision with our recognised trade union in South Africa, SASBO.”The bank said that requiring vaccination will help to reduce the burden on the health system, which means more capacity for people who are injured or sick from other causes – including Covid – to get better care.There is a powerful macroeconomic rationale for vaccination, it said.“The more people are vaccinated, the lower the risk of future ‘lockdowns’ and travel bans. As more people are vaccinated, business and investor confidence will undoubtedly also improve. Hence, getting vaccinated protects jobs and helps the economy to recover.”“Vaccination isn’t just a personal matter or purely matter of operational efficiency. Vaccination helps our countries and our continent to recover faster from the pandemic. By getting vaccinated, we will contribute to driving Africa’s growth, which is the Group’s purpose.” said Tshabalala.Read: The best and worst banks in South Africa – according to customersComments section policy:South Africa has complained it is being punished - instead of applauded - for discovering Omicron, a concerning new variant of Covid-19.The foreign ministry made the statement as countries around the world restricted travel from southern Africa as details of the spread emerged.Early evidence suggests Omicron has a higher re-infection risk.The World Health Organization (WHO) said on Friday that the new variant was "of concern".Several cases have now been identified in Europe - two in the UK, two in Germany, one in Belgium and another one in Italy, while a suspected case was found in the Czech Republic. Israel, where the new variant has been confirmed, has decided to ban all foreigners from entering the country from midnight Sunday.The measure will last for 14 days, according to the Times of Israel.Omicron cases have also been detected in Botswana, Hong Kong and Israel. Hundreds of passengers arriving in the Netherlands from South Africa are being tested for the new variant.Some 61 people on two KLM flights were positive for Covid-19 and have been quarantined at a hotel near Amsterdam's Schiphol airport while they have further tests, Dutch officials said.The Netherlands is currently struggling with a record-breaking surge in cases. An extended partial lockdown comes into force there on Sunday evening.The new Omicron variant was first reported to the WHO from South Africa on 24 November.A statement by the South African foreign ministry on Saturday strongly criticised the travel bans."Excellent science should be applauded and not punished," it said.The bans were "akin to punishing South Africa for its advanced genomic sequencing and the ability to detect new variants quicker".The statement added that the reaction had been completely different when new variants were discovered elsewhere in the world.An African Union official told the BBC developed countries were to blame for the emergence of the variant."What is going on right now is inevitable, it's a result of the world's failure to vaccinate in an equitable, urgent and speedy manner. It is as a result of hoarding [of vaccines] by high-income countries of the world, and quite frankly it is unacceptable," said AU vaccine delivery alliance co-chair Ayoade Alakija."These travel bans are based in politics, and not in science. It is wrong... Why are we locking away Africa when this virus is already on three continents?" On Friday and Saturday, a number of countries announced new measures:The WHO said the number of casesÂ of this variant, initially named B.1.1.529, appeared toÂ be increasingÂ in almost all of South Africa's provinces.Â "This variant has a large number of mutations, some of which are concerning," the UN public health body said in a statement on Friday.It said "the first known confirmed B.1.1.529 infection was from a specimen collected on 9 November". This video can not be playedThe WHO said it would take a few weeks to understand the impact of the new variant, as scientists worked to determine how transmissible it was.A top UK health official warned that vaccines would "almost certainly" be less effective against the new variant.But Professor James Naismith, a structural biologist from the University of Oxford, added: "It is bad news but it's not doomsday."The head of the South African Medical AssociationÂ told the BBC that the cases found so far in South Africa - where only about 24% of the population is fully vaccinated - were not severe,Â but said investigations into the variant were still at a very early stage. "The patients are mostly complaining about a sore body and tiredness, extreme tiredness and we see it in the younger generation, it's not the older people... We're not talking about patients that might go straight to a hospital and be admitted," Dr Angelique Coetzee said.Â US infectious disease chief Dr Anthony Fauci said that while the reports on the new variant threw up a "red flag", it was possible that vaccines might still work to prevent serious illness.The WHO has warned against countries hastily imposing travel restrictions, saying they should look to a "risk-based and scientific approach".Dozens test positive on SA-Netherlands flightsOne dead and dozens burned in Indonesia eruptionSchool shooting suspect's parents deny manslaughterEuropean envoys may return to Afghanistan - MacronReady for power: Team Scholz promises a new GermanyRos Atkins onâ¦ Americaâs abortion divide. VideoRos Atkins onâ¦ Americaâs abortion divideWhy Indian-born CEOs dominate Silicon Valley'I woke up in ICU... and didn't know what was real'Is low vaccination a factor in the rise of Omicron?Striking pictures from around the world this weekWhy Ugandan troops have entered DR Congo - againA race for equal rights: Formula 1 in Saudi ArabiaThe man who volunteered to be imprisoned in AuschwitzNightmare boss. Pointless tasks.Welcome to The OfficeA story of murder, drugs and gang warsThe extraordinary rise and fall of underworld boss Paul MasseyÂ© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.BusinessTechAt face value, requiring unvaccinated employees to produce negative Covid-19 test results regularly, rather than being fully vaccinated, appears to be justifiable as a reasonable accommodation measure to minimise Covid-19 health and safety risks in the workplace, say legal experts at law firm ENSAfrica.However, the firm noted that this would likely be contingent on several factors, including:“Accordingly, the frequency and efficacy of the chosen test must achieve the desired purpose of ensuring a healthy and safe work environment as far as reasonably practicable,” ENSAfrica said.“If an employer only requires employees to test negative every two weeks, this is unlikely to ensure a healthy and safe environment where the employees are in-office every day and in circumstances where a negative test may only be valid for 72 hours.”Who pays? The question of whether the production of a negative test is one aspect that an employer must consider when implementing a testing regime. However, the question in most employers’ minds is who will pay?Seemingly a knee-jerk reaction is to require employees to pay where they have refused the vaccination. It may be more tricky than that, though, ENSAFrica said.“Of course, where unvaccinated employees are happy to pay for the tests themselves, there is unlikely to be an issue. It may also be possible for employers and unvaccinated employees to agree to a payment plan in terms of which the costs of the tests may be split between the parties,” the law firm said.“Where discord is created by requiring employees to pay for testing solely, employers should expect legal challenges.”ENSAfrica said that the Consolidated Direction on Occupational Health and Safety in Certain Workplaces is not specific or prescriptive on the issue of payment for Covid-19 testing. In fact, it deals fairly cursorily with the topic, the firm said.Instead, the firm pointed to previous case law and whether the cost of testing would be financially onerous for a business.“If the cost of implementing Covid-19 tests is within an employer’s means, then they would likely be hard-pressed to justify requiring employees to pay for the test.“If it is the case that it will cause the employer unjustifiable hardship, it might be justified in offering employee-funded testing to the employee as an alternative to dismissal, in circumstances where there are no other reasonable accommodations that can be made,” ENSAfrica said.Similarly, it might be justifiable that the costs are shared between the employer and employee, the firm said. “Ultimately, employers should guard against too robust of an approach when navigating legitimate objections to vaccinations as it might be seen as punitive.“The legal framework relating to reasonable accommodation holds employers to a fairly high threshold which ordinarily requires the employers to foot the bill for any accommodation offered.”Read: The best and worst case scenarios for the Omicron variant in South Africa: economistsComments section policy:Saturday, 04 December03 Dec
A South African Air Force Falcon 50 VIP jet was scrambled for a medical evacuation (medevac) out of Abuja, Nigeria, on Thursday after at least two members of President Cyril Ramaphosa's security team tested positive for Covid-19.Thandi Modise, Minister of Defence, who is travelling with Ramaphosa, confirmed to journalist Carien du Plessis in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, that the members had tested positive and were in the process of being evacuated.Asked why they were not being treated in Nigeria, which constituted the first leg of Ramaphosa's official visit to west Africa, Modise said the decision was taken as a matter of convenience.
A South African Air Force Falcon 50 VIP jet was scrambled for a medical evacuation (medevac) out of Abuja, Nigeria, on Thursday after at least two members of President Cyril Ramaphosa's security team tested positive for Covid-19.Thandi Modise, Minister of Defence, who is travelling with Ramaphosa, confirmed to journalist Carien du Plessis in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, that the members had tested positive and were in the process of being evacuated.Asked why they were not being treated in Nigeria, which constituted the first leg of Ramaphosa's official visit to west Africa, Modise said the decision was taken as a matter of convenience.4h agoLife - Daily
                    Take a breather in your busy day with this curated collection of relaxing reads, real-life stories, interviews, everyday tips, and expert insights.
                10h ago27 Nov25 Jun22 Nov13 Nov06 Nov30 Nov26 Nov25 Nov11 Nov 2019Contact the public editor with feedback for our journalists, complaints, queries or suggestions about articles on News24.BusinessTechThe South African Medical Research Council (SAMRC) has flagged an increasing ‘volatility’ in the concentration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA fragments in wastewater samples in recent weeks.The SAMRC’s Wastewater Surveillance Programme operates a wastewater research and surveillance programme to detect early warning systems for Covid-19.The team, with their laboratory and municipal partners, collects samples of wastewater weekly from more than 70 wastewater treatment plants across four provinces to test for non-infectious RNA fragments of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which causes Covid-19.According to the SAMRC’s Wastewater Surveillance Programme leader, Dr Mongezi Mdhluli, after nearly two months of being predominantly very low, the levels of SARS-CoV-2 RNA fragments in wastewater are now increasing.“While the concentrations of the non-infectious SARS-CoV-2 RNA fragments remain low, relative to what we saw in wastewater at the height of the third Covid-19 wave, it is notable that the increasing volatility in viral fragment loads is now being observed at wastewater treatment plants in both urban and rural areas.”This includes all provinces in which the SAMRC Wastewater Surveillance Programme is underway, namely the Eastern Cape, Gauteng, Limpopo and Western Cape.SAMRC president Professor Glenda Gray said the observation does not spell out the start of the fourth wave at this stage.“We believe it is a signal to which we need to pay very close attention, especially when coupled with the increase in Covid-19 cases, as well as hospitalisations, that we have been seeing in recent days,” Gray explained.The Professor has since urged people to vaccinate since the evidence shows that inoculation dramatically reduces Covid-19 disease, hospitalisation, death, and is the most powerful prevention measure citizens have right now.“While we cannot at this point say that we are on the cusp of the fourth wave of Covid-19, it is nevertheless prudent for all South Africans to ensure that they and their loved ones become vaccinated as soon as possible and at the very least before the upcoming holiday season,” said Gray.In addition, she said everyone has a role to play in curbing the Covid-19 pandemic.“In this regard, vaccination and our behaviour are the main keys,” she said, encouraging all South Africans to increase their vigilance and adhere strictly to the simple but powerful, non-pharmaceutical Covid-19 prevention measures.These include wearing a mask, using hand sanitiser, keeping a distance of at least 1.5 metres from others and avoiding gatherings.In addition, when gatherings are unavoidable, they should be held in outdoor spaces or as many windows and doors as possible must be opened to increase ventilation when inside.Read: New modelling shows what to expect from fourth Covid-19 wave in South AfricaComments section policy:AdvertisementBy Lynsey Chutel, Andrés R. Martínez and Mike IvesScientists in South Africa on Thursday identified a concerning new coronavirus variant with mutations that one scientist said marked a “big jump in evolution,” prompting several countries to quickly limit travel from the region.Within hours, Britain, Israel and Singapore had restricted travel from South Africa and some neighboring countries, citing the threat of the new variant. By Friday, markets were down in Japan in response to the discovery, and officials in Australia and in New Zealand said that they were monitoring the new variant closely.The European Commission will also propose restricting air travel to the bloc from southern Africa based on concerns over the variant, Ursula von der Leyen, the commission’s president, said in a Twitter post on Friday. She referred to it by its scientific name, B.1.1.529.The @EU_Commission will propose, in close coordination with Member States, to activate the emergency brake to stop air travel from the southern African region due to the variant of concern B.1.1.529.In the past two days, scientists detected the variant after observing an increase in infections in South Africa’s economic hub surrounding Johannesburg. So far, 22 positive cases have been identified in the country, according to South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases. Two cases were detected in Hong Kong, both apparently linked to someone who had traveled from South Africa. No cases have been detected yet in Britain.A number of variants have emerged since the onset of the pandemic. One underlying concern about them is whether they will stymie the fight against the virus or limit the effectiveness of vaccines. South African scientists will meet with the World Health Organization technical team on Friday to discuss the new variant, and the authorities will assign it a letter of the Greek alphabet.But governments are not waiting to impose restrictions. By Thursday evening, Britain had banned flights from South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Namibia and Zimbabwe, starting at noon local time on Friday. The six nations will be added to the country’s red list, which would require British travelers coming from those nations to quarantine on arrival.“More data is needed but we’re taking precautions now,” Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said on Twitter.In a statement posted Friday on a government website, South Africa said it would urge Britain to reconsider the measure, saying: “The U.K.’s decision to temporarily ban South Africans from entering the U.K. seems to have been rushed, as even the World Health Organization is yet to advise on the next steps.”Within a few hours, officials from Israel and Singapore had announced that they, too, would add the same countries to their red lists, along with Mozambique.In December 2020, South Africa was the first nation to report the appearance of the Beta variant, which has now spread to nearly 70 countries. Scientists have been concerned that some clinical trials have shown that vaccines offer less protection against the Beta variant. Since then, the more virulent and aggressive Delta variant has spread all over the world and is believed to be fueling the latest surge in cases.The variant has also been identified in Botswana. The country’s health ministry confirmed in a statement that four cases of the new variant were detected in people who were all fully vaccinated. All four were tested before their planned travel. With over 1,200 new infections, South Africa’s daily infection rate is much lower than in Germany, where new cases are driving a wave. However, the density of mutations on this new variant raises fears that it could be highly contagious, leading scientists to sound the alarm early.“This variant did surprise us, it has a big jump in evolution, many more mutations than we expected, especially after a very severe third wave of Delta,” said Tulio de Oliveira, director of the KwaZulu-Natal Research and Innovation Sequencing Platform.The B.1.1.529 variant has a “very unusual constellation of mutations,” with more than 30 mutations in the spike protein alone, Mr. de Oliveira said. The spike protein is the chief target of antibodies that the immune system produces to fight a coronavirus infection. So many mutations raised concerns that Omicron’s spike might be able to evade antibodies produced by either a previous infection or a vaccine.Scientists are still unclear on how effective existing vaccines will be against the new variant, which displays mutations that might resist neutralization.The variant shares similarities with the Lambda and Beta variants, which are associated with an innate evasion of immunity, said Richard Lessells, an infectious diseases specialist at the KwaZulu-Natal Research and Innovation Sequencing Platform.“All these things are what give us some concern that this variant might have not just enhanced transmissibility, so spread more efficiently, but might also be able to get around parts of the immune system and the protection we have in our immune system,” Mr. Lessells said.The new variant has largely been detected among young people, the cohort that also has the lowest vaccination rate in South Africa. Just over a quarter of those ages between 18 and 34 in South Africa are vaccinated, said Dr. Joe Phaahla, the country’s minister of health.While cases of the new variant are mainly concentrated in the country’s economic hub, particularly in the capital, Pretoria, it is “only a matter of time” before the virus spreads across the country as schools close and families prepare to travel for the holiday season, Mr. Phaahla said.Alexandra E. Petri contributed reporting.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byGlobal HealthScientists in a cutting-edge laboratory do part of the work. Local health workers on foot do the rest.Send any friend a storyAs a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.By Stephanie NolenNTUZUMA, South Africa — A few months ago, Sizakele Mathe, a community health worker in this sprawling hillside township on the edge of the city of Durban, was notified by a clinic that a neighbor had stopped picking up her medication. It was a warning sign that she had likely stopped taking the antiretroviral tablet that suppresses her H.I.V. infection.That was a threat to her own health — and, in the era of Covid-19, it might have posed a risk to everyone else’s. The clinic dispatched Ms. Mathe to climb a hill, wend her way down a narrow path and try to get the woman back on the pills.Ms. Mathe, as cheerful as she is relentless, is part of a national door-to-door nagging campaign. It’s half of a sophisticated South African effort to stanch the emergence of new variants of the coronavirus, like the Omicron strain that was identified here and shook the world this past week.The other half takes place at a state-of-the-art laboratory 25 miles down the road. At the KwaZulu-Natal Research Innovation and Sequencing Platform in Durban, scientists sequence the genomes of thousands of coronavirus samples each week. The KRISP lab, as it is known, is part of a national network of virus researchers that identified both the Beta and Omicron variants, drawing on expertise developed here during the region’s decades-long fight with H.I.V.This combination of high tech and grassroots represents one of the front lines in the world’s battle against the evolving coronavirus. On Friday, the research network in South Africa reported to a world waiting anxiously for new information that the new variant appeared to spread twice as quickly as Delta, which had been considered the most contagious version of the virus.The researchers at KRISP are global leaders in viral phylogenetics, the study of the evolutionary relationship between viruses. They track mutations in the coronavirus, identify hot spots of transmission and provide crucial data on who is infecting whom — which they deduce by tracking mutations in the virus across samples — to help tamp down the spread.Since the start of the pandemic, they have been closely scrutinizing how the virus changes in South Africa because they are worried about one thing in particular: the eight million people in the country (13 percent of the population) who live with H.I.V.When people with H.I.V. are prescribed an effective antiretroviral and take it consistently, their bodies almost completely suppress the virus. But if people with H.I.V. aren’t diagnosed, haven’t been prescribed treatment, or don’t, or can’t, take their medicines consistently each day, H.I.V. weakens their immune systems. And then, if they catch the coronavirus, it can take weeks or months before the new virus is cleared from their bodies.When the coronavirus lives that long in their systems, it has the chance to mutate and mutate and mutate again. And, if they pass the mutated virus on, a new variant is in circulation.“We have reasons to believe that some of the variants that are emerging in South Africa could potentially be associated directly with H.I.V.,” said Tulio de Oliveira, the principal investigator of the national genetic monitoring network.See which countries have reported cases of the Omicron variant.In the first days of the pandemic, South Africa’s health authorities were braced for soaring death rates of people with H.I.V. “We were basically creating horror scenarios that Africa was going to be decimated,” said Salim Abdool Karim, an epidemiologist who heads the AIDS institute where KRISP is housed. “But none of that played out.” The main reason is that H.I.V. is most common among young people, while the coronavirus has hit older people hardest.An H.I.V. infection makes a person about 1.7 times more likely to die of Covid — an elevated risk, but one that pales in comparison with the risk for people with diabetes, who are 30 times more likely to die. “Once we realized that this was the situation, we then began to understand that our real problems with H.I.V. in the midst of Covid was the prospect that severely immunocompromised people would lead to new variants,” Dr. Abdool Karim said.Researchers at KRISP have shown that this has happened at least twice. Last year, they traced a virus sample to a 36-year-old woman with H.I.V. who was on an ineffective treatment regimen and who was not being helped to find drugs that she could tolerate. She took 216 days to clear the coronavirus from her system; in that time inside her body, the viruses acquired 32 different mutations.In November, Dr. de Oliveira and his team traced a coronavirus sample with dozens of mutations to a different part of the country, the Western Cape, where another patient was also poorly adhering to the H.I.V. drug regimen. The coronavirus lingered in her body for months and produced dozens of mutations. When these women were prescribed effective drugs and counseled on how to take them properly, they cleared the virus quickly.“We don’t have a lot of people like her,” Dr. Abdool Karim said of the woman who took 216 days to clear the coronavirus from her system. “But it doesn’t take a lot of people, it just takes one or two.” And a single variant can rattle the world, as Omicron has.The origin of this variant is still unknown. People with H.I.V. are not the only ones whose systems can inadvertently give the coronavirus the chance to mutate: It can happen in anyone who is immunosuppressed, such as transplant patients and those undergoing cancer treatments.By the time the KRISP team identified the second case of a person with H.I.V. producing coronavirus variants, there were more than a dozen reports of the same phenomenon in medical literature from other parts of the world.Viruses mutate in people with healthy immune systems, too. The difference for people with H.I.V., or another immunosuppressing condition, is that because the virus stays in their systems so much longer, the natural selection process has more time to favor mutations that evade immunity. The typical replication period in a healthy person would be just a couple of weeks, instead of many months; fewer replications mean less opportunities for new mutations.And because South Africa has so many people with H.I.V., and because this new pandemic has struck hard here, disrupting life in many ways, there is a particular urgency to the work of trying to block the variants.That is where the efforts of community health workers such as Ms. Mathe come in. On a typical workday, she walks dirt paths past leaking standpipes and front-step hair salons, armed with an ancient cellphone and a mental roster of who has turned up at the clinic lately, who is looking unwell and who needs a visit. Ms. Mathe, who herself has been on H.I.V. treatment for 13 years, is paid $150 a month.Silendile Mdunge, a thin 36-year-old mother of three, stopped taking her antiretrovirals during the brutal third wave of Covid that hit South Africa between May and July. Her drugs were no longer being delivered to a nearby community pickup point because many health care workers were redeployed. Instead she was supposed to collect the pills at a central clinic about nine miles away. But she feared contracting this new virus in a shared taxi or standing in the huge clinic lines that she heard about.The Omicron variant. The latest Covid-19 variant was identified on Nov. 25 by scientists in South Africa and has since been detected in more than 40 countries, including the U.S. New York said on Dec. 2 it had identified the first cases in the state, and at least 11 other states have reported infections. Should you be concerned? Here are answers to common questions about this variant.Understanding the mutation. Scientists in South Africa said that the Omicron variant appeared to spread more than twice as quickly as Delta and that past coronavirus infections give little immunity against it. In the United States, sequencing labs are speeding up the screening of samples from travelers.Biden’s winter Covid plan. As Omicron reached the U.S., President Biden announced a new pandemic strategy that includes hundreds of family-centered vaccination sites, booster shots for all adults, new testing requirements for international travelers and insurance reimbursement for at-home tests.Travel restrictions and lockdowns. Germany has announced tough restrictions on unvaccinated people, barring them from many aspects of public life. Japan, Israel and Morocco have stopped all foreign travelers, and Australia delayed reopening its borders. Here’s what to know about travel restrictions.She was off the medication for four months before Ms. Mathe turned up at the small home built of scrap wood that Ms. Mdunge shares with seven family members.“She told me that people who defaulted on their treatment are no longer living, she told me I must think of my children, she said I could die,” said Ms. Mdunge, leaning on the rough door frame in a warm, light rain. Those were things she already knew, in the abstract.But the persistent presence of Ms. Mathe made the warnings difficult to ignore. With a shrug and an eye roll, Ms. Mdunge suggested that she restarted treatment to end the pestering as much as anything else.Ms. Mathe listened to this recounting of her methods with a grin. “If you didn’t have love for people, you wouldn’t do this job,” she saidOf the eight million South Africans with H.I.V., 5.2 million are on treatment — but just two-thirds of that group are successfully suppressing the virus with medication. The problem extends beyond South Africa’s borders: 25 million people live with the virus across sub-Saharan Africa, of whom 17 million are virally suppressed with treatment.The KRISP lab is sequencing coronavirus samples from across Africa, to fill some of the gaps for countries that do not have their own capacity to do so. South Africa’s surveillance network and genomic sequencing are comprehensive enough that its researchers may be first to detect even cases that do not originate in the country.The great fear is a variant with “immune escape”: the ability to elude Covid vaccines or the immune response elicited by previous infection. As more and more people in South Africa get vaccinated against Covid, there is the potential for a variant to be brewing in the body of a vaccinated person.“You have a situation where you’ve got the potential to create really nasty variants,” said Dr. Abdool Karim, who has helped lead South Africa’s Covid response. Previous variants emerged when few people had access to vaccination, but now South Africa has delivered the shot to more than a third of its citizens. If vaccinated people with H.I.V. don’t have or don’t take their antiretrovirals, there could be an opportunity for the virus to mutate to evade the vaccine.“Now, many of these H.I.V. patients have been vaccinated so they have their immune responses. So, if they were to generate a new variant, that variant is going to have to escape those immune responses,” Dr. Abdool Karim said.Dr. de Oliveira said he was worried less about a vaccine-resistant variant emerging in South Africa than, for example, a pocket of the United States with untreated H.I.V., low vaccination coverage and a weaker surveillance network than South Africa has.“The chances are we’d find it first,” he said with a grim laugh.The difference with the risk from mutating virus in people with uncontrolled H.I.V., he pointed out, is that it is a problem with a ready solution — getting everyone with the H.I.V. on treatment — whereas a transplant or cancer patient has no options.Above all, the answer to ending the variant threat is to stifle coronavirus transmission. “Vaccinate, vaccinate, vaccinate the population of Africa,” he said. “My worry is the vaccine nationalism or the hoarding of the vaccine.” People with H.I.V. should be prioritized for vaccine boosters, to maximize the effectiveness of their immune responses, he added.So far, South Africa’s efforts to tackle the variant issue, and be transparent about it, have come at a steep price, in the form of flight bans and global isolation.“As scientists, especially in the kind of forefront, we debate playing down the H.I.V. problem,” Dr. de Oliveira mused in his lab last week. “If we are very vocal, we also risk, again, big discrimination and closing borders and economic measures. But, if you are not very vocal, we have unnecessary deaths.”Carl Zimmer contributed reporting.AdvertisementA Minnesota man who recently visited New York City for a crowded anime convention has tested positive for the Omicron variant. Mayor Bill de Blasio said “we should assume” the variant is spreading in the city. New York state reported the most daily cases since January. President Joe Biden called on health providers to expand the availability of vaccines and booster shots, aiming to combat a winter surge of infections – and hold off Omicron.Pfizer expects its vaccine to hold up against the new variant, an executive said, as the strain continued to pop up in countries around the world, with a handful of infections discovered in countries including Singapore, India and South Korea. Germany imposed stringent nationwide restrictions on people who aren’t vaccinated to halt a surge in infections. Lawmakers are considering a national vaccine mandate. Key developments New York reports most daily cases in almost a year New York reported 11,300 new cases, the highest daily total since January, Governor Kathy Hochul announced in a statement. The state also reported total patients hospitalised with Covid-19 rose by 71 to 3,093.President Biden takes aim at US winter surge President Joe Biden called on health providers to expand the availability of vaccines and booster shots, aiming to combat a winter surge of infections – and hold off the new Omicron variant.Biden outlined a new strategy to curb the pandemic in a speech at the National Institutes of Health on Thursday, with cases rising in several states. He said his administration would also make free home Covid tests more available by requiring insurers to pay for them and “accelerate efforts to vaccinate the rest of the world.”“My plan I’m announcing today pulls no punches in the fight against Covid-19,” he said.US hospitalisations rise in 39 states Omicron is stealing most of the attention, but it’s the Delta variant that’s pressuring the US healthcare system.The seven-day average of hospital admissions with confirmed Covid-19 has climbed 18% in the past two weeks to 6,691, the highest since October 13, according to US Department of Health and Human Services data. The numbers are ticking higher in 39 states and the nation’s capital. France weighs new restrictions The French government will hold a defence Cabinet meeting Monday to review possible new restrictions to counter what the prime minister called the “fifth wave of the coronavirus”.“We’ll see if additional measures are appropriate,” Jean Castex said during a visit to a hospital in Angouleme, southwest France. “The situation is worrying.”This was Castex’s first trip, after spending 10 days in isolation with mild Covid symptoms. He is vaccinated.Omicron reinfection risk higher: study The risk of reinfection from the Omicron coronavirus variant is three times higher than for any previous variant, according to a South African study of infections since the start of the pandemic.The finding provides evidence of Omicron’s “ability to evade immunity from prior infection,” according to the authors, Juliet Pulliam of the South African Centre for Epidemiological Modelling and Analysis and Harry Moultrie of the National Centre for Communicable Diseases.Minnesota reports Omicron case with New York City link  A Minnesota man who recently visited New York City for a crowded anime convention has tested positive for the Omicron variant.“We should assume there is community spread of the variant in our city,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Thursday.The adult individual was vaccinated and had received a booster in early November, Minnesota Health Commissioner Jan Malcolm told reporters. The man reported attending the Anime NYC 2021 convention at the Javits Center from November 19-21. He developed mild symptoms on November 22 and was tested on November 24. His symptoms have since resolved.Walgreens Boots Alliance cancels Maine booster shots over staffing issues  Walgreens Boots Alliance, a critical player in the US vaccination campaign, has cancelled some booster-shot appointments in Maine due to staffing issues, a state health official said. People began reporting the issue on Twitter last week to Nirav Shah, the director of the northern New England state’s Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Shah said he contacted Walgreens, thinking he could help if there was a supply shortfall. Zimbabwe reports Omicron case Zimbabwe has identified its first case of the Omicron variant, a day after announcing a 10-day mandatory quarantine of all travellers entering the country.“We have already identified that we now have it in this country,” Vice-President Constantino Chiwenga, who is also the nation’s health minister, told a meeting of farmers Thursday in the capital, Harare. He did not provide further details on the origins of the case.President Emmerson Mnangagwa on Wednesday announced rules imposing quarantine on all travellers entering the country, including returning residents. Hundreds of thousands of Zimbabweans who work and live in neighbouring South Africa, which was first to disclose detection of the new variant, are expected to travel home over Christmas.UK cases surge The UK reported the most new coronavirus cases since before its “Freedom Day” on Thursday, amid fears that the Omicron variant could disrupt the holiday season for another year.A further 53,495 cases were reported, the highest since July 17, although there have been a handful of days close to that number before today. That’s compared to a 7-day rolling average of about 44,600 new cases a day.Thanks to a comprehensive vaccine uptake, the number of deaths and people in hospital in the UK has remained consistently low compared to previous outbreaks.Oslo tightens curbs after Omicron case Oslo is heading back to working from home and using face masks after an outbreak at a Christmas party raised the prospect of a jump in Omicron variant infections.Home office will now be required for part of the week in Norway’s capital and 21 other municipalities, while face masks must be worn in shops, public transport, bars and restaurants, Health and Care Services Minister Ingvild Kjerkol told reporters on Thursday. Bars will have to serve customers at tables, guests will need to register to receive notices of infection exposure and limits will be placed on events held inside.Germany imposes curbs for unvaccinated Germany imposed nationwide restrictions on people who aren’t vaccinated against Covid-19 and limited attendance at football games and other public events to check a brutal surge in infections.  In one of her final acts as chancellor, Angela Merkel held talks with her incoming successor, Olaf Scholz, and Germany’s 16 regional premiers on Thursday, where they agreed on new curbs including allowing only people who are vaccinated or recovered into restaurants, theatres and non-essential stores.The officials also backed a plan to make Covid shots mandatory, saying that the lower house of parliament would vote on it soon. Scholz said he expects the measure to pass. Finland, Greece confirm Omicron presence Finland confirmed its first case of the Omicron variant on a person who had returned from Sweden.Other people travelling with the person had also tested positive for the coronavirus, but the variant was not yet confirmed from their samples. Greece has found its first case of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, Health Minister Thanos Plevris told reporters on Thursday. The case was detected on the island of Crete in a Greek citizen who had arrived from southern Africa on November 26., he said.Singapore detects imported Omicron cases Singapore has detected two imported cases who tested preliminary positive for the Omicron variant, after both individuals arrived on a flight from Johannesburg.They were isolated upon arrival in the island state on December 1 and had not interacted in the community. Both individuals, who tested negative during their pre-departure tests, are fully vaccinated and have mild symptoms. India detects first Omicron cases India confirmed two cases of the Omicron variant in the southern state of Karnataka, home to the nation’s Silicon Valley.The two infected individuals have mild symptoms and are males aged 66 and 46, Lav Agarwal, a senior health ministry official, told reporters at a Thursday briefing in New Delhi, without elaborating.Pfizer optimistic on Omicron protection Pfizer expects data on how well its shot protects against Omicron to be available within two to three weeks.“We don’t expect that there will be a significant drop in effectiveness,” Ralf Rene Reinert, vice-president of vaccines for international developed markets, said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. “But again, this is speculation. We will check this. We will have the data in the next couple of weeks.” Glaxo says its treatment effective against Omicron GlaxoSmithKline said its Covid-19 antibody treatment appears to be effective against the Omicron variant in early testing.Lab tests of the mutations found in the variant showed the drug is still active against the virus, Glaxo said. The drugmaker is now conducting in vitro testing to confirm the response against a combination of all the Omicron mutations.Omicron spreading faster in South Africa’s Gauteng province The Omicron coronavirus variant is spreading faster in the Gauteng province, the epicentre of the latest outbreak in South Africa, than the Delta strain or any of the earlier mutations, an adviser to the provincial government said. There is the “strongest acceleration in community transmission ever seen in South Africa,” Bruce Mellado, the adviser, said in a presentation on Thursday. This is “consistent with dominance of a variant that is more transmissible,” he said.South Africa announced the discovery of a new variant, later named Omicron, on November 25 as cases began to spike and the strain spread across the globe. National daily cases almost doubled on Wednesday, days after countries across the world halted flights to and from southern Africa. DM– With assistance from Vivek Shankar, Claire Che, Randy Thanthong-Knight, Andreo Calonzo, Felix Tam, Paul Tugwell, Stacie Sherman, Charles Capel, Ania Nussbaum and Luke McGrath."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receive
                                            'The variant discovered in southern African states has been identified in Israel,' Israel's health ministry said, adding it was recorded 'in a person who returned from Malawi#.
                                        JERUSALEM - Israel has identified a case of a COVID-19 variant with a large number of mutations first detected in South Africa, the health ministry said Friday."The variant discovered in southern African states has been identified in Israel," the ministry said, adding it was recorded "in a person who returned from Malawi".Two more cases were detected in "people returning from abroad", it said, adding that they had been placed in quarantine.ALSO READ:• Germany, Italy ban travel from SA over new COVID variant• With new COVID variant found in SA, questions raised over vaccine efficacy• UK to ban travel from SA, five other African countries due to new COVID variant• Renewed uncertainty about tight lockdowns ahead of Dec due to new variant• SA records 22 cases from new COVID variant, Phaahla says number steadily rising• New COVID-19 variant detected in SA - NICDThe three people were all vaccinated, the health ministry said, without specifying the number of doses or the type of vaccine.News of its spread to Israel comes a day after scientists in South Africa said they had detected the new B.1.1.529 strain with at least 10 mutations, compared with two for Delta.The variant was of "serious concern" and had been blamed for a surge in infection numbers, authorities in South Africa said Thursday.It had also been detected in Botswana and Hong Kong among travellers from South Africa, they said.Israel was one of the first countries to launch vaccines against the coronavirus last year thanks to a deal with Pfizer that gave it access to millions of doses in exchange for data on the vaccine's efficacy.More than 5.7 million of the country's nine million people are now fully vaccinated.Israeli Prime Minister Naftali Bennett called a meeting on Friday morning with public health officials and his government to take stock of the COVID situation in the country.The World Health Organization is due to hold a meeting later Friday to decide if the new strain should be designated a variant of "interest" or of "concern".Israel had already late Thursday placed on its "red list" the southern African nations of Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe because of the discovery of the variant.Over the summer, the Jewish state experienced an upsurge in coronavirus infections, fuelled by the Delta variant, and launched one of the earliest campaigns for booster shots.On Tuesday, Israel rolled out COVID-19 vaccinations for children aged five to 11, one of only a handful of countries to inoculate minors that young as it seeks to stem another pandemic wave.Earlier this month, Israel held a "war game drill" in case of an outbreak of a new lethal variant of COVID-19.The simulation covered different aspects of a crisis, including mass inoculation, ordering curfews and imposing a flight ban.WATCH: What we know about the new COVID-19 variant in SA






                                            All members of the travelling party will be required to quarantine for 10 days on arrival in Ireland, putting in doubt their scheduled European Champions Cup opener away to Wasps on 12 December.
                                        JOHANNESBURG - The Munster rugby team, stranded in South Africa, have discovered nine more coronavirus cases in their ranks, the Irish province said on Tuesday.They will join one other team member in a quarantine hotel in Cape Town until the end of their isolation period.The Irish government had said the players or coaches that have received negative results are cleared to travel by the South African authorities.But Munster said in a statement: "The touring party have completed another round of PCR testing this morning, the third in less than 60 hours, and will wait on results ahead of next steps..."While the individuals (new cases) were disappointed on receiving the news they are thankfully well and will continue to be monitored medically at this time."All members of the travelling party will be required to quarantine for 10 days on arrival in Ireland, putting in doubt their scheduled European Champions Cup opener away to Wasps on 12 December.A spokesperson for European Professional Club Rugby, which organises that competition, said: "We are monitoring the situation and are in contact with the clubs."Munster travelled to South Africa to play United Rugby Championship (URC) matches against the Bulls in Pretoria last Saturday and the Lions in Johannesburg this weekend.Both matches were cancelled after the discovery of the new Omicron variant as were the fixtures that Cardiff, Scarlets and Zebre Parma were due to play in South Africa.Cardiff, whose delegation includes two positive cases, are still in Cape Town.As the Welsh team await news of when they can fly home, the South Africa media reported that some unnamed squad members have experienced panic attacks.Cardiff were due to leave Cape Town on Sunday but are now under strict lockdown and barred from leaving their hotel rooms.The Welsh government has rejected a request to allow the players to quarantine in a hotel in Wales which had agreed to accommodate the Scarlets, currently in Belfast after leaving South Africa, and Cardiff simultaneously."Those (COVID-19) laws are things that everybody needs to abide by and there will be no exceptions to that," said Welsh health and social services minister Eluned Morgan."Obviously, we are interested in bringing our boys home. But they will have to come home in the same way that everybody else in this country would be expected to come home."The URC was launched this year as a successor to the Pro14 competition and includes four teams each from Ireland, Wales and South Africa and two each from Italy and Scotland. 







BusinessTechJapan’s government announced on Friday (26 November) that it would tighten border controls for visitors from South Africa and five other African countries after the discovery of a new variant of Covid-19, Reuters reports.The announcement comes hours after the UK government placed South Africa and five other countries onto its much-maligned travel ‘red list’ following the emergence of the new variant in Southern Africa.UK health Secretary Sajid Javid said that from noon on Friday (12h00 GMT, 26 November), flights to and from the countries will be temporarily banned. Any UK nationals arriving from the specified countries will have to quarantine.Other countries are likely to follow the UK’s example as the variant, designated as B.1.1.529 by the WHO, has sparked concerns about its transmissibility, severity and potential vaccine resistance.Singapore and Israel have already announced new travel restrictions, while India has issued an advisory to all states to rigorously test and screen international travellers from South Africa and other “at-risk” countries amidst concerns over the variant.Germany has also halted flights to the country, while the European Union will propose a halt on air travel from southern Africa, Bloomberg reported.Australia and New Zealand, meanwhile, have adopted a ‘wait and see’ approach, with officials still assessing the threat posed by the variant.Scientists are still unclear on how effective existing vaccines will be against the new variant, which displays mutations that might resist neutralization.The variant shares similarities with the Lambda and Beta variants, which are associated with an innate evasion of immunity, said Richard Lessells, an infectious diseases specialist at the KwaZulu-Natal Research and Innovation Sequencing Platform.“All these things are what give us some concern that this variant might have not just enhanced transmissibility, so spread more efficiently, but might also be able to get around parts of the immune system and the protection we have in our immune system,” Lessells said.A mapping tool developed by travel website Skyscanner shows that as of 26 November, South Africa has 78 ‘major restrictions’ from other countries in place. This is up from around 60 major restrictions before the third Covid wave hit.These countries have suspended travel, may be closed to entry, or entry may only be possible if you are a citizen/meet strict entrance requirements.By comparison, there are currently 27 moderate restrictions for South Africa, where travel is possible, but only if travellers meet certain entry requirements, including taking Covid-19 tests.Read: UK bans travel to South Africa over new Covid variantComments section policy:BusinessTechThe Department of Health plans to roll out further ‘upgrades’ to South Africa’s Covid-19 certificate – but there are limitations on how the certificate can currently be used abroad.The department’s acting director-general Dr Nicholas Crisp told eNCA that the certificate is being rolled out in three phases:Crisp said that the certificate is currently designed to allow access to events in South Africa – including sports, restaurants and workplaces – and that it will be some time before these features are available abroad.This means South Africa’s vaccine certificate cannot be ‘read’ internationally, with international Covid-19 vaccine certificates also not readable locally.Crisp added that international discussions around improved functionality will likely continue until the end of the year. However, he cautioned that expanding the certificate for international use has a significant cost associated with it.“At this stage, we are trying to work out where to get the money for the last phase. Remember, the number of people that travel abroad is very small compared to the number of people it was designed for in South Africa. The first and most important step is that it is useful here.”Crisp said that while the certificates are ‘recognised’ internationally, they are not necessarily readable. He added that thousands of South Africans have still travelled overseas without issue.He said that he would engage with the Department of International Relations and Cooperation to develop a list of the countries where the South African Covid-19 certificate is accepted.
Second phase The Covid-19 certificate is currently only available to people fully vaccinated against Covid-19, with users required to fill in their contact details, including their ID number and Electronic Vaccination Data System (EVDS) code.Upon entering these details, users will be sent a one-time PIN confirming the authenticity of the information they have provided. The PIN can then be entered to access the final, digital Covid-19 vaccine certificate.In a media briefing on 12 November, Health minister Dr Joe Phaahla officially announced phase 2 of the certificate that will see the QR codes embedded on the digital certificates ‘go live’.This will allow third-party groups to use the QR codes to verify the validity of the info on the card, he said.The opening up of the QR code to third parties will allow private businesses and the government to better monitor who has or has not been vaccinated and could pave the way for the further reopening of sports and other events in South Africa.It could also make it easier to monitor areas where mandatory Covid-19 vaccination policies have been put in place.Read: New modelling shows what to expect from fourth Covid-19 wave in South AfricaComments section policy:
                                            Dutch authorities began testing for the Omicron variant after 61 out of 600 passengers on board two flights from South Africa to Amsterdam on Friday tested positive for COVID-19.


                                        THE HAGUE - Dutch health authorities said on Sunday they had found at least 13 cases of the new Omicron strain among 61 quarantined passengers who tested positive for coronavirus after arriving from South Africa."The Omicron variant has so far been identified in 13 of the positive tests. The investigation has not yet been completed. The new variant may be found in more test samples," the National Institute for Public Health (RIVM) said in a statement.Dutch authorities began testing for the Omicron variant after 61 out of 600 passengers on board two flights from South Africa to Amsterdam on Friday tested positive for COVID-19.READ: Dutch say 61 Covid positive on flights from S.AfricaHealth Minister Hugo de Jonge made an "urgent request" to people returning from southern Africa to get tested for Covid "as soon as possible"."It is not unthinkable that there are more cases in the Netherlands," De Jonge told reporters."Yes, we are concerned. But how much we don't know yet."The minister added: "What is important now is that we keep our finger on the pulse, and keep up with the sequencing" of COVID tests to look for the new variant.The positive cases are being kept in quarantine at a hotel near Amsterdam's Schiphol Airport.





Please enter a term before submitting your search.
        Access provided by 
If you don't remember your password, you can reset it by entering your email address and clicking the Reset Password button. You will then receive an email that contains a secure link for resetting your passwordIf the address matches a valid account an email will be sent to __email__ with instructions for resetting your passwordDOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02752-5
COVID-19 Resource Centre

Access the latest 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) content from across The Lancet journals as it is published.
  
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. To update your cookie settings, please visit the Cookie Preference Center for this site.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. except certain content provided by third parties. The content on this site is intended for healthcare professionals.


Privacy Policy   Terms and Conditions



 Subscribe or Login Subscribe or LoginWith increasing talk of making Covid-19 vaccination mandatory in South Africa, you will  want to have your vaccine certificate at the ready. For those with identity documents, one possible obstacle might be that you misplaced your vaccination code, but this is easily rectifiable. But, if you are undocumented, the process might be near impossible. Downloading your vaccine certificate can take less than two minutes — if you are vaccinated (fully or partially) and have a vaccination code. If you deleted or lost your code in the flurry of SMSs sent your way during the vaccination process, you can easily get one. Either call the Covid-19 public hotline 0800 029 999 or send a message to the WhatsApp support line 0600 123 456 or email  [email protected]. Remember to have a valid South African ID number, foreign passport number or an asylum/refugee number ready. The department of health announced early in October that people living in South Africa could apply for a Covid-19 vaccine certificate through a digital vaccination certificate portal. Back then, national vaccination roll-out coordinator Nicholas Crisp said those who had received a second jab of the two-dose Pfizer vaccine, or perhaps a possible booster jab in the future, needed to update their existing certificate with the updated information. Here’s a step-by-step guide to download a vaccine certificate through the South African Covid-19 Vaccine Certificate System. Once you have downloaded the certificate, you will be advised by the department when an update to your certificate version is available. The QR Code is not usable by the general public and is for purposes to verify your certificate’s validity using a vaccine certificate system inbuilt QR scanner. Only people who have received their Covid-19 vaccine in South Africa are eligible to access the vaccination certificate.The health department is “busy piloting a system” for people who are undocumented in South Africa to get vaccinated — and get a certificate, said media relations officer Foster Mohale. He added that it was “very complex” because undocumented people cannot get vaccinated at all sites. There are only three centres that can assist such people.Gauteng health spokesperson Kwara Kekana said that people without identity documents can be vaccinated on Tuesdays at the Hillbrow Clinic in Johannesburg. Ased how vaccination certificates were then issued, Kekana said she did not know. In Cape Town, healthcare workers administer vaccinations to undocumented people  through a paper system, according to health communication head in the Western Cape Marika Champion. Although there is no designated centre in the province for such vaccinations, the department works closely with centres for homeless people.Asked about how undocumented people can get a vaccination certificate, Champion said “it is a problem” that requires a more long-term solution. It might be even more difficult to get a vaccine in KwaZulu-Natal, not to mention a vaccine certificate. The province’s health spokesperson Agiza Hlongwane, said undocumented people, specifically foreigners, are afraid to come forward for fear of retribution.For those without any valid documentation who still want to get vaccinated, they can go to the Denis Hurley Centre in Durban that administers vaccines from Tuesday to Thursday.Subscribe for R30/mth for the first three months. Cancel anytime.Subscribers get access to all our best journalism, subscriber-only newsletters, events and a weekly cryptic crossword.M&G PremiumM&G Premium Already a subscriber? Sign in hereM&G PremiumM&G PremiumM&G PremiumFor all the latest information and advice from the Department of Health relating to Covid-19, please visit sacoronavirus.co.za 


Contact UsStory Tip-offsPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyEthics & Social Media PolicyAbout UsCorrections And ClarificationsAdvertisingTerms of Service and SecurityTerms of UseMail & Guardian JobsFind property for saleWe value your feedbackSubscriber login FAQSubscriptionsAll material © Mail & Guardian Online. Material may not be published or reproduced in any form without prior written permission.Saturday, 04 December03 DecSabine Stam didn't expect to have her feet up at this time of the year, sipping white wine on the deck of a half-empty safari lodge near South Africa's Kruger National Park.Her tour company was full of bookings for the December peak season. Then Omicron came.First reported by South African scientists to the World Health Organisation on 24 November, Omicron had since unleashed global panic, as countries rushed to shut their borders, reimpose travel restrictions and ramp up vaccination programmes.Stam, 36, scrambled to rush a dozen European tour parties already in South Africa back to Belgium and Holland, her main market along with Britain and the US.READ | Omicron: Dirco slams travel bans by other African nationsSince then, she's struggled to convince hundreds of cancelling customers to postpone rather than ask for refunds."It's quite a kick in the nuts ... and maybe the last for a lot of businesses here," she said, overlooking a pond that lured wild animals to delight guests."Last year it was easy for clients to postpone because nobody really knew what was going on," she told AFP.But now "everyone is too scared to set a new travel date".Undaunted, waiters in white shirts lit candles as the sun set behind a mountain backdrop, casting golden light over laid-out dinner tables.Thinking out of the boxSnowbirds from the northern hemisphere normally flock to South Africa's austral summer. Before the pandemic, in 2019, tourism was 6.9 percent of South Africa's economy.Last year it plunged to 3.7%, as foreign arrivals dropped 71%. Hopes of a rebound this year seem dimmer now.The Khaya Ndlovu Manor House, one of many high-end lodges near the famed Kruger National Park, opened its restaurant and safaris to everyone when Covid restrictions first eased.With around 70% of guests coming from Europe and the US before the pandemic hit, the lodge also cut prices by almost half to align with local budgets.READ | Covid vaccines expected to protect against hospitalisation caused by Omicron, says expert"We managed to stay afloat thinking out of the box a lot," said sales manager Shannon Maclean, greeting guests from the bar as she oversaw preparations for the evening.However, business still isn't good.Less than half the beds were booked for the night, mainly by South Africans doing business with nearby citrus farms.Staff had been upbeat about the end of 2021 as international bookings picked up in September.The lodge recently hosted two weddings and a 40th birthday with guests from abroad. They had been preparing for another destination wedding when the latest travel bans landed.Back to square one"It was so nice to hear international accents again and stories from far away... how their lockdowns worked," Maclean sighed."Now it seems like we are almost back to square one."With all international bookings cancelled for the first half of December, Maclean was concerned about the knock-on effect on other businesses.Food suppliers, airport transfers, and guides are all suffering as a result, she said. South Africa's tourist industry had been particularly hard-hit by the pandemic.READ | SA refused to red-list African countries in 2020. Four have imposed restrictions on SAThe country, worst-affected by coronavirus in Africa with almost three million recorded cases,  was shut for most of 2020 then blacklisted at the end of last year over the discovery of another variant.Britain, a major source of foreign visitors, only took South Africa off its travel "red list" at the start of October.It was the first to impose a flight ban when Omicron surfaced.The variant had since been detected in more than two dozen countries, although France announced a partial resumption of flights from South Africa this weekend."That's the best news," said Stam. "I hope other countries will follow really soon."But Omicron had seen daily caseloads roughly doubling every day all week, raising concern among health officials ahead of the festive season.4h agoLife - Daily
                    Take a breather in your busy day with this curated collection of relaxing reads, real-life stories, interviews, everyday tips, and expert insights.
                10h ago27 Nov25 Jun22 Nov13 Nov06 Nov30 Nov26 Nov25 Nov11 Nov 2019Contact the public editor with feedback for our journalists, complaints, queries or suggestions about articles on News24.Anthony Fauci urged vaccinated adults to get booster shots now that health regulators have approved them for everyone 18 years and older, as US infections trend upward and the holidays near. Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg said he doesn’t expect disruptions to US holiday-season travel.Protests against virus restrictions in Europe widened, amid a second night of violence in the Netherlands and clashes with the police in Brussels on Sunday. On Monday, a national lockdown goes into effect in Austria, which spurred large crowds to the streets of Vienna on Saturday.A debate in Germany over whether to impose compulsory vaccinations against Covid-19 is picking up steam, after Austria last week became the first European country to do so. Expanding the UK’s vaccine booster programme is the key to a successful Christmas season without new restrictions, Health Minister Sajid Javid said.Key developments French cases surge A fifth Covid-19 wave kicked off “at a blazing speed” even though France is better off than many other European countries thanks to early adoption of so-called health passes and high vaccination levels, government spokesman Gabriel Attal said on Europe 1 on Sunday. France reported 19,749 cases in the past 24 hours, up from 12,496 the previous Sunday. There were 15 new deaths, bringing the total number to 118,461. Authorities are already bolstering checks to make sure that health passes are checked at restaurants, cafes and other venues given that citizens had started “being relaxed” about the rules of late, Attal said. Attal also said that special police forces are being sent to Guadeloupe amid persisting protests against health passes in the French overseas territory. He called the violences of the past days “intolerable and unacceptable”. More calls for compulsory vaccination in Germany A debate in Germany over whether to impose compulsory vaccinations is picking up steam after Austria last week became the first European country to take the controversial step.Schleswig-Holstein Premier Daniel Guenther said he’d be open to the measure if Germany can’t manage to escape the pandemic without it, according to an interview with Die Welt. Tilman Kuban, head of the youth wing of Chancellor Angela Merkel’s conservative bloc, wrote in the same newspaper that he’s in favor of “de facto” mandatory vaccinations. The country’s association of paediatricians also urged compulsory shots for all adults.Other politicians have said they’re sceptical that the move would be possible. Members of the Social Democrats will discuss the option in an internal call with medical experts on Monday, Die Welt said.No holiday travel disruptions in US US Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg said he doesn’t expect a vaccine requirement that includes airport security screeners to disrupt US holiday-season travel.Many US federal employees, including Transportation Security Administration workers, face a Monday deadline to document full vaccination or apply for an exemption, though any discipline for workers who don’t comply isn’t immediate.“The deadline tomorrow, that’s not a cliff,” Buttigieg said on NBC’s Meet the Press on Sunday. “People aren’t getting immediately pulled off their posts. It’s part of a process to make sure that everyone in the federal workforce is safe.”Europe demonstrations widen Dutch police and protesters clashed for a second night, amid demonstrations against tightened virus restrictions in several European countries. At least five police officers were injured and 40 people arrested on Saturday night, the Associated Press reported. The police shot and injured at least two people in clashes on Friday night.   Thousands of demonstrators took to the streets of Belgium’s capital, Brussels, on Sunday to protest against new measures enacted to combat the  spread of Covid-19, including a health pass that allows vaccinated, tested or recently recovered individuals to enter bars, cafes and gyms in the country. Footage on Twitter showed two water cannons being used to dispel the protesters.Austria was calm the day before the nation was set to go into its fourth lockdown. Tens of thousands protested on Saturday against the lockdown and a requirement that all Austrians must be vaccinated by February. Putin gets booster Russian President Vladimir Putin said he’d got his booster shot on Sunday. In televised comments, the Russian leader (69) said he received the locally developed Sputnik Light vaccine, which consists of the first injection of the Sputnik V two-shot inoculation. Putin received his first vaccination with Sputnik V in March.Though Putin touted Sputnik as the first vaccine approved in the world, Russia has lagged in using it, with only about 40% of the population inoculated amid widespread popular scepticism. In September, Putin went into self-isolation for several weeks amid a Covid outbreak among his aides and staff that he blamed on them failing to get booster shots in time.In his televised comments Sunday, Putin said he’d be willing to participate in clinical trials of a nasal-spray version of the vaccine that’s now under development.Fauci urges boostersAnthony Fauci urged vaccinated adults to get booster shots now that health regulators have approved them for everyone 18 years and older, as US infections trend upward and the holidays near.President Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser sought to clear up what has been criticised as confusing guidance around booster shots. On Friday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention expanded the approval for booster doses from Pfizer/BioNTec and Moderna for all adults, regardless of medical condition or possible elevated exposure to the virus.  “There’s no ambiguity,” he said on ABC’s This Week. “We really hope that people go out there and utilise this very important tool.”He said on CNN’s State of the Union that 60 million eligible Americans had not yet been vaccinated. Asked if a booster shot would be needed to be fully vaccinated, Fauci said experts would “let the data guide” any future recommendations.Israel’s infection reproduction rate on the rise Israel’s Covid-19 infection reproduction rate rose to over one, the highest since early September, indicating the virus is spreading again.Prime Minister Naftali Bennett acknowledged the rise at the start of a Cabinet meeting. “Winter is starting and we are on the verge of what is shaping up to be a wave of child illness,” the premier said. Israel starts vaccinating children aged five to 11 this week. It opened its doors to fully vaccinated tourists earlier this month.UK sees no need yet for ‘Plan B’ There’s no need yet for the UK to implement “Plan B” to clamp down on Covid infection levels, said Health Minister Sajid Javid. Javid said expanding the UK’s vaccine booster programme is the key to a successful Christmas season without new restrictions, speaking on Sky News’ Trevor Philips on Sunday.Javid also confirmed a report in The Sunday Times that he had begun a review into possible racial bias in medical equipment, and how it may have slanted treatment for Covid. The move comes after research showing that oximeters, devices that measure oxygen levels in the blood, are less accurate on patients with darker skin. Swiss cantons delay boosters until January Many Swiss cantonal health services won’t be able to offer Covid booster shots to those under 65 until January, newspaper SonntagsZeitung reported, citing Gundekar Giebel, a spokesman for the cantonal health department in Bern.The federal government had previously said it hoped to make booster shots available to those under 65 beginning in December.Germany seven-day incidence rate increases Germany’s infections continued to climb, with the seven-day incidence rate increasing to 372.7 per 100,000 people compared with 362.2 the previous day. With intensive-care units all but filled in some regions, Europe’s largest economy faces its biggest test yet of the pandemic.The country reported 42,727 new cases, compared with 63,924 the day before. Deaths rose by 75 to a total of 99,062.Latest China outbreak continues to wane China reported 17 new confirmed Covid cases on Saturday, including four local infections, as its latest outbreak continues to wind down. Three were found in Liaoning’s Dalian and one in Yunnan. DM – With assistance from Andy Hoffman, Gwen Ackerman, Albertina Torsoli, Gregory L. White, John Ainger and Alexander Weber."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receiveFauci and top U.S. officials project strength in fighting Omicron, which has been found in at least 11 states. New research in South Africa indicates that the variant can spread more easily than Delta. Follow our live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic and the Omicron variant.F.D.A. authorizes Eli Lilly antibody treatment for high-risk young children.Fauci and other top U.S. health officials project resolve in fighting the Omicron variant.Omicron is spreading more than twice as quickly as the Delta variant in South Africa, scientists report.More states detect the Omicron variant as U.S. health officials brace for community spread.Short-handed hospitals in upstate New York fill up as Covid cases surge.A man in Italy tries to get a shot in a fake arm to qualify for a vaccination certificate.A Christmas party in Norway becomes a possible Omicron-spreading event, and other international news.The Food and Drug Administration on Friday authorized Eli Lilly’s monoclonal antibody treatment for infants and children under age 12 with Covid-19 who are at high risk of becoming severely ill from the virus because they have a condition such as obesity or diabetes.Previously, high-risk Covid patients 12 or older had been eligible to get the drugs, which are typically administered intravenously at a clinic or hospital and have been shown to lower the risk of hospitalization and death.Until now, “we haven’t had something for young kids” with Covid that could keep them out of the hospital, said Dr. Walid F. Gellad, who is the director of the Center for Pharmaceutical Policy and Prescribing at the University of Pittsburgh’s School of Medicine.An updated list of potential treatments for Covid-19.The authorization comes as fears are rising about a winter surge fueled by the new Omicron coronavirus variant, which appears to be spreading because of a mix of its contagiousness and its ability to dodge the body’s immune defenses. It is not yet known how Omicron may affect young children compared to other versions of the virus or whether Lilly’s antibody treatment may be less effective against it.Hospitalizations of children with Covid soared over the summer during a surge in Delta cases. Among the states that report the data, between 0.1 percent and 1.9 percent of all confirmed cases of Covid in children have resulted in hospitalization, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics.The F.D.A. said that body-weight-adjusted doses of Lilly’s treatment, a cocktail of two antibody drugs, were studied in a safety trial that enrolled 125 pediatric patients.“Parents of young kids, especially high-risk young kids, have had a difficult time because even though their kids are at lower risk, the focus has not been on that age, until recently with the vaccinations,” Dr. Gellad said. “It’s always good to have another option, but it’s always worth reiterating it doesn’t take the place of vaccination.”— Rebecca Robbins Senior U.S. health officials on Friday sought to reassure an anxious public that the federal government is doing all it can to track and tamp down the spread of the new coronavirus variant, Omicron.Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the top medical adviser to President Biden, said at a press briefing that the scientists are closely monitoring the rate at which cases double to see whether Omicron will overtake Delta to become the dominant variant in the United States — and if so, when. The variant has now been detected in 10 states, though most cases involve returning travelers. Within about two weeks, he said, “we’ll know more about transmission, immune evasion and severity of disease.”He suggested that with the emergence of the new variant, which has multiple troubling mutations that have yet to be fully assessed, booster shots were even more important. He said that studies now indicated that a third dose of the vaccines made by Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna markedly increased recipients’ level of antibodies, and raised the levels of memory B and T cells. All three are important indicators of how well the immune system can protect against the coronavirus.“Although we haven’t proven it yet, there’s every reason to believe that if you get vaccinated and boosted that you would have at least some degree of cross protection, very likely against severe disease, even against the Omicron variant,” he said.On Thursday, the day after the first reported case of an Omicron infection in the United States, more people got vaccinated than any day since May, according to Jeffrey D. Zients, President Biden’s coronavirus response coordinator. Mr. Zients said 2.2 million shots were administered, including more than one million booster shots.While drawing conclusions from one-day totals is risky, especially when the holiday season could cause lags in reporting, Mr. Zients called the uptick “important progress.”Dr. Rochelle P. Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the nation is better equipped to fight the virus than it was a year ago, citing more prevention and treatment methods, and “more knowledge and experience from addressing other variants such as Delta.”— Sharon LaFraniere Underscoring increasing concerns about Omicron, scientists in South Africa said on Friday that the newest coronavirus variant appeared to spread more than twice as quickly as Delta, which had been considered the most contagious version of the virus.Omicron’s rapid spread results from a combination of contagiousness and an ability to dodge the body’s immune defenses, the researchers said. But the contribution of each factor is not yet certain.“We’re not sure what that mixture is,” said Carl Pearson, a mathematical modeler at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine who led the analysis. “It’s possible that it might even be less transmissible than Delta.”Dr. Pearson posted the results on Twitter. The research has not yet been peer-reviewed nor published in a scientific journal.On Thursday, researchers reported that the new variant may partly dodge immunity gained from a previous infection. It’s still unclear whether, or to what degree, Omicron may evade protection conferred by the vaccines.But some experts said they would expect the outcome to be similar.“It’s scary that there are so many reinfections happening, which means that vaccine-induced immunity may also be impacted in similar way,” said Akiko Iwasaki, an immunologist at Yale.The Omicron variant has appeared in nearly two dozen countries. The United States has identified at least 10 cases in six states. President Biden reiterated on Friday morning that his administration’s newest pandemic measures, which were announced this week, should be sufficient to blunt the spread of Omicron.The variant was first identified in South Africa on Nov. 23 and has quickly come to account for about three-quarters of new cases in that country. South Africa reported 11,535 new coronavirus cases on Thursday, a 35 percent jump from the day before, and the proportion of positive test results increased to 22.4 percent from 16.5 percent.“It is actually really striking how quickly it seems to have taken over,” said Juliet Pulliam, the director of an epidemiological modeling center at Stellenbosch University in South Africa, who led the earlier research on immunity.Omicron cases are doubling roughly every three days in Gauteng province, which is home to South Africa’s densely populated economic hub, according to the new estimates by the researchers.In a mathematical analysis, they estimated the variant’s Rt — a measure of how quickly a virus spreads — and compared it with the metric for Delta. They found that Omicron’s Rt is nearly 2.5 times as high as that of Delta’s.That figure depends on not just how contagious the variant may be, but also its ability to sidestep the body’s immune defenses once it reaches a new host.Lynsey Chutel contributed reporting. — Apoorva Mandavilli With cases of the Omicron variant now recorded from New York to Hawaii, health officials across the United States say that community spread of the virus is inevitable, with one case already traveling from an anime convention in New York City to Minnesota.President Biden is confronting the worrisome new variant with a strategy that encourages boosters for all adults, and aims to expand testing availability and improve its affordability, plans laid out in a speech from the National Institutes of Health on Thursday.Mr. Biden reiterated on Friday morning that his administration’s new measures were sufficient to deal with the spread of the new variant.“I think I know a fair amount about this issue, but I’m not a scientist, so I continue to rely on the scientists, and asking them whether or not we have to move beyond what we did yesterday,” he said at the White House, speaking in a voice hoarse enough that he ended up assuring reporters that he had a cold, not Covid. “Right now they’re saying no.”Additional cases of Omicron are being reported in all corners of the country. On Friday, state health officials confirmed three cases in Maryland, all in the Baltimore area, and officials in Philadelphia said that they had found one case, a man in his 30s. Six cases were found in Nebraska and one in Missouri, officials said, and one in Utah, involving a person who had recently traveled to South Africa. New Jersey officials also reported their first Omicron case late Friday. Gov. Phil Murphy said that a fully vaccinated woman who had recently traveled to South Africa tested positive for the Omicron variant after being treated at an emergency department in northern New Jersey. She was in isolation with mild symptoms, officials said.On Thursday, officials in New York State had announced that they had confirmed five cases of the variant: a 67-year-old woman in Suffolk County who returned from South Africa; two residents of Queens; one resident of Brooklyn; and another person in New York City who had traveled recently. The vaccination status of most of the individuals remained unknown.Another case was identified in a vaccinated man from Minnesota who had recently traveled to New York City for an anime convention at the Javits Center in Midtown Manhattan, which hosted 53,000 attendees over three days. Officials immediately urged all convention participants to get tested.A vaccinated Colorado resident who had recently returned from southern Africa was that state’s first confirmed case. An additional case in California — the first being in San Francisco on Wednesday — was announced in Los Angeles county. The infected person had been vaccinated and had traveled to South Africa in November.The authorities in Nebraska on Friday said that of the six cases involving the Omicron variant found there, only one of which was in a vaccinated person. One of the infected people had returned from Nigeria on Nov. 23, they said, and the other five were likely exposed through household contact with the person. None had required hospitalization.But an Oahu resident with no history of travel is the first Omicron case in Hawaii.“This is a case of community spread,” the state’s department of health said in a news release. The individual had previously been infected with the coronavirus but was never vaccinated.See which countries have reported cases of the Omicron variant.The variant has prompted concern among scientists and public health officials because of an unusually high number of mutations. But it will be weeks, at the least, before scientists can say with confidence whether it is more contagious (early evidence suggests it is), whether it causes more serious illness and how it responds to vaccines.Adeel Hassan contributed reporting.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this report misstated the vaccination status of people who were found to be infected with the Omicron variant in Nebraska. Five of the six people had not been vaccinated, not one person. — Lauren McCarthy A surge in Covid cases and a shortage of health care workers are filling hospitals and nursing homes past their capacity in upstate New York, creating a growing crisis in the health care system even before the Omicron variant is known to have spread through the area, according to hospital executives from Buffalo to Albany.Covid hospitalizations in the region have more than tripled since August when the Delta wave began to sweep through the state, Gov. Kathy Hochul said this week. At the same time, tens of thousands of health care workers have left their health care jobs, for reasons ranging from pandemic burnout to a refusal to get vaccinated in spite of the state’s strict mandate for health care workers, and some systems have posted hundreds of available job openings.The result has been a decrease in upstate hospital capacity of about 10 percent. And a perfect storm of high patient volumes, reduced staff and an inability to discharge patients to nursing homes — which are themselves full — has begun to overwhelm some facilities, particularly in Western New York, the Finger Lakes region and a swath of the state north of Albany, hospital executives said.With Omicron now detected in New York City and on Long Island and the variant expected to spread, and few hospital beds upstate available for patients if Covid hospitalizations spike even higher, Ms. Hochul has declared a state of emergency.On Wednesday, she announced that 120 National Guard troops would be deployed to back up nursing home staffs around the state. The governor’s office has so far announced nine facilities — nursing homes in Rochester, Buffalo, on Long Island and elsewhere — where soldiers will work. More locations will be announced soon.The governor also said that all hospitals at over 90 percent capacity may be ordered to stop elective surgeries to deal with the surge. There were 56 hospitals in that category on Friday, including 10 in New York City, some of which had already taken that step.“Hospitalizations are up, get this number, 150 percent upstate versus downstate,” Ms. Hochul said on Monday, of the rise in Covid hospitalizations since August. “Not that I’m trying to create an upstate-downstate divide in our state,” she added, “but these are the numbers we’re seeing and they’re very troubling.”— Sharon Otterman OMAHA — Researchers in Nebraska had just finished sequencing six samples of the Omicron variant, the most discovered anywhere in the United States. They just didn’t know it yet.In a closet-size room with two chairs and no windows, the scientists had extracted the genetic information from 64 new coronavirus samples, as they do every day, to determine whether any of those patients might have the worrisome new variant. Hours later, Dr. Baha Abdalhamid opened an email and saw the results.“This batch, I was waiting for it,” said Dr. Abdalhamid, the assistant director of the Nebraska Public Health Laboratory. “Once I downloaded the results as an Excel sheet, I screened the 64 samples right away, and sure enough, six of them were Omicron.” Nebraska officials announced the six cases, the state’s first, on Friday.Around the world, scientists are racing to understand how widespread Omicron is and how severe a threat it may pose. That has placed labs like Dr. Abdalhamid’s on the front lines of the fight against the coronavirus pandemic.Underscoring growing concerns about Omicron, scientists in South Africa said on Friday that the variant appeared to spread more than twice as quickly as Delta, until now the fastest-moving version of the virus. It is still unclear whether or to what degree Omicron may evade protection from the current vaccines.In the United States, a hunt for the variant began last week when South African researchers announced Omicron’s array of worrisome mutations. The search has intensified in recent days, with at least 10 states identifying cases. Researchers are combing through wastewater samples for any sign of the variant. Contact tracers are ramping up efforts in places where cases have emerged.And at sequencing labs like the one in Nebraska, a state where case rates are already high and hospitals are already strained, scientists have sped up the screening of samples from international travelers to see if Omicron has arrived.Local health officials in rural southeastern Nebraska said that among the cases Dr. Abdalhamid found, one person had recently traveled to Nigeria and was believed to have passed the virus on to the five others in the same household after returning to Nebraska. None of the patients has had severe symptoms; only one had been vaccinated.— Mitch Smith On Thursday morning at a vaccination center in Biella, Italy, a veteran nurse faced something she had never seen before.The nurse, Filippa Bua, was preparing to give a man a dose of Covid vaccine when she realized that the small patch of arm he offered in a gap between his sweatshirt and T-shirt looked much pinker than his face.When she touched it, she realized what was wrong.“Rubber foam,” said Ms. Bua, 59. “It was made of rubber foam.”The man — whose identity was not disclosed for privacy reasons — wore a thick theater corset covered in rubber foam, to which two foam arms were attached, according to Ms. Bua. She added that it was “quite well made.” His goal, she said, was to obtain a vaccination certificate, enabling him to go to work without actually getting the shot.The stratagem was the latest and perhaps most original episode of vaccine evasion in the struggle between Italy’s government and the country’s anti-vaccine faction. Italy appears to have fewer vaccine skeptics than other European countries do, but, apparently, some in that camp are very determined.About 13 percent of Italy’s adult population have not had a single shot, and cases have been rising since mid-October.The country has adopted several measures to push skeptics to get a vaccine. It became the first in Europe to mandate vaccinations for health care workers, then broadly required people to obtain a health certificate, or Green Pass, to participate in many social activities and to go to work.Last week, Italy announced that people would need proof of vaccination to sit inside bars and restaurants, and required the same proof from all hospital staff, teachers and law enforcement officers.But those fighting vaccination became more creative. Reports emerged about a trade in fake health passes on Telegram groups and of anti-vaccination doctors who injected their patients with saline instead of vaccine in order for them to get a certificate.The attempt to get vaccinated in a fake arm, however, is perhaps the most audacious scheme to have emerged.Ms. Bua said that following the extension of the vaccination requirements, more patients have shown up for their first shots, albeit mostly dragging their feet. Some urged her to inject them quickly, some cried and some cursed the government or their children for forcing them to the vaccination line.The foam-armed man, on the contrary, was pleasant and serene, she said, though her own reaction was anything but.“It was so humiliating,” Ms. Bua said, “thinking that a nurse cannot tell the difference between rubber foam and skin.”The health authorities reported the episode to the police. Alberto Cirio, the president of the Piedmont region where Biella is located, said that the episode was “of enormous gravity, unacceptable given the sacrifice our community is enduring because of the pandemic.”— Emma Bubola The speaker of the New Jersey State Assembly said Friday that next week’s committee hearings would be held remotely, after several Republican lawmakers defied a new requirement to show proof of Covid-19 vaccination or a negative coronavirus test on Thursday.Before Thursday’s voting session — the first since the requirement that anyone entering the State House complex in Trenton show a negative test or proof of vaccination — about a dozen Republican state representatives purposely tried to enter the Assembly chamber without those documents to cast their votes. They were briefly stopped by uniformed troopers — a delay one lawmaker, Erik Peterson, characterized as “tyranny” — before being allowed in. A reporter for Politico posted a video of the scene on Twitter. After being told he and his fellow Republicans couldn’t enter the chamber without proof of vaccination, Mr. Peterson turned to the people recording the scene on their cameras and said: “You see this? You see this, folks? Denying us entry into our house.” Then he added: “This is tyranny, folks! America, see what’s happening here!”pic.twitter.com/cFoWwikQfNRepresentative Craig J. Coughlin, a Democrat who is Assembly speaker, said he was “outraged” after learning from state troopers that several lawmakers had been allowed into the chamber after not complying with the vaccination rules.“The only thing that was asked of the legislators here today to do was to show that they weren’t infected, to care about their colleagues and the people in the chamber,” he said in a speech in the chamber. “Twenty-eight members of the minority caucus could not be bothered to exhibit common decency or humanity, all because they would rather have a couple of minutes of TV.”The policy was set by the State Capitol Joint Management Commission, a panel of administration and legislative officials who manage the State House rules. Lawmakers can cast their vote remotely if they don’t comply with the rules, and a few of the 28 Republicans and 52 Democrats used that option on Thursday.The session, the first in the lame-duck period between November’s election and the start of the new legislature in January, lasted less than 30 minutes and a child tax credit was approved.While staff members were checking documents at entrances around the State House and rapid testing was available, enforcement was not uniform and the test kits were not used, said Cecilia Williams, a spokeswoman for Mr. Coughlin.At the same time, the Senate met without similar drama. Republicans, who are the minority in both chambers, have sued to stop the vaccine requirement. Republicans flipped seven seats in the legislature in last month’s election.“Voters were crystal clear: they want economic relief from Trenton — not more mandates and lockdowns,” Tom Szymanski, executive director of the New Jersey Republican Party, said Thursday.— Adeel Hassan Global RoundupAround half of the people who attended an office Christmas party in Oslo, where only vaccinated employees were admitted, have tested positive for the coronavirus after one guest recently returned from South Africa was found to carry the new Omicron variant, local health authorities said on Friday.More than 120 people attended the event, held a week ago by a solar power company. Of the positive tests sequenced so far, between 15 and 20 were likely to be the Omicron variant, according to Dr. Tine Ravlo, a local chief physician involved in tracking the outbreak, who added that not all of the 60 coronavirus cases found so far had yet been fully checked for the variant.“We are expecting more of them to likely be Omicron infections,” she said.A spokesman for the company, Scatec, said that only vaccinated staff had been admitted to the party, and everyone had tested negative for the coronavirus before the event.The party was held at a restaurant called Louise in central Oslo on Nov. 26, the same day that the World Health Organization labeled Omicron a “variant of concern” and many countries started closing their borders to passengers from southern Africa, where it was first identified.The variant carries mutations that scientists say could allow it to spread more quickly and to cause more breakthrough infections, though much remains uncertain. Cases have now been reported in more than 40 countries, including in the United States.The Scatec spokesman, Stian Tvede Karlsen, said that the employee first found to have the variant had arrived back in Norway from visiting a regional office in Cape Town before news of the variant had come out.In order to curb further spread of the variant, the Norwegian government announced on Thursday additional restrictions in and around Oslo. Enforcement started at midnight.They include the obligation to wear masks anywhere that social distance cannot be maintained, including on subways and buses or in shops; a return to working from home if possible; and a cap on crowds of 100 people, except at theaters and other places with fixed seats, where up to 600 can be present. Only table service is permitted for alcoholic drinks, and restaurants and events need to register guests.In other news from around the world: Nightclubs, restaurants and cinemas in Auckland, New Zealand’s largest city, reopened to vaccinated customers on Friday, more than 100 days after the city went into lockdown because of an outbreak of the Delta variant. The reopening comes as the country moved to its new post-vaccination “traffic light” classification system, in which unvaccinated people are mostly shut out of public life.Officials in South Korea said on Friday that they would temporarily reverse the phased reopening they began last month, lowering the cap on group sizes for social gatherings and requiring proof of vaccination or a negative coronavirus test for entry to restaurants, cafes and other facilities starting next week. The announcement came as nearly 80 percent of the country’s hospital beds for patients with severe illness were in use, and days after six cases of the Omicron variant were confirmed among inbound travelers.Ireland announced on Friday new restrictions ahead of the Omicron variant’s inevitable arrival, Reuters reported. Starting Tuesday and until Jan. 9, indoor events will be capped at half capacity, bars and restaurants can seat tables of only six people or fewer, nightclubs will close and residents can host no more than three other households in their own homes. The government will restart its Pandemic Unemployment Payment program for those who work in the entertainment industry and lose work because of the measures.A pair of hippopotamuses at the Antwerp Zoo in Belgium have tested positive for the coronavirus, The Associated Press reported. Imani, 14, and Hermien, 41, are now in isolation, and their enclosure will be shuttered to the public until the land mammals test negative. The cases are the first recorded instances of the coronavirus in the species. It’s unclear how they got it.— Thomas Erdbrink, Henrik Pryser Libell, Natasha Frost and John Yoon Some of the first cases of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus to be detected in Botswana — which were among the first known in the world — were in foreign diplomats who had traveled to the country from Europe, the country’s president said.President Mokgweetsi Masisi told CNN on Thursday that four diplomats who tested positive for the coronavirus on Nov. 11, and who were later found to be carrying the new variant, “came from a number of countries.” He added: “Yes, some had been to Europe, and some had been elsewhere.” He did not offer more details.On Sunday, Botswana’s health minister, Edwin Dikoloti, asserted that most of the 19 Omicron cases that have been detected in his country were “imported.” Officials have not said how that determination could have been made. Until now, Botswana had not disclosed the nationalities or other details of the four diplomats, with officials saying that they wanted to avoid stigmatizing other nations. The president’s comments highlight that scientists still cannot say with certainty where the variant originated.Last week, after Botswana and South Africa became the first countries to identify the variant, many Western nations, including the United States, closed their borders to travelers from southern Africa. It was sometimes called the “Botswana variant,” before the World Health Organization last Friday labeled it a “variant of concern” and named it Omicron.Mr. Masisi described the travel bans as “irresponsible,” saying that those nations were experiencing far worse coronavirus outbreaks than Botswana. With Omicron infections now detected in more than 40 countries, he added, Western nations could not say for certain how many cases of the variant were already “in your own backyard.”Instead, he said, rich countries should have focused on ensuring a more equitable distribution of Covid vaccines, particularly to Africa, which has the lowest vaccination rate of any continent.“Why does it take this to drive the point home, that no one is safe until we are all availed the vaccines?” he said.In an earlier statement, the government said that scientists in Botswana had detected the new variant after testing four diplomats who entered the country on Nov. 7. They tested positive for the coronavirus on Nov. 11, and genetic sequencing confirmed on Nov. 24 that they were carrying the variant. By then, officials have said, the diplomats had returned to their home countries.— Lynsey Chutel First identified in Botswana and South Africa, this new iteration of the coronavirus has prompted concern among scientists and public health officials because of an unusually high number of mutations that have the potential to make the virus more transmissible and less susceptible to existing vaccines.Here is a look at what we know — and don’t know — about the variant so far:The World Health Organization has called Omicron a “variant of concern” and warned that the global risks posed by it were “very high,” despite what officials described as a multitude of uncertainties. Cases have already been identified in over 40 countries and several U.S. states.It’s too early to say how widespread the variant will become in the United States. As of Dec. 3, cases had been identified in 11 states, but experts say that number is likely to markedly increase in the coming days and weeks. The first person to have tested positive for the variant returned to San Francisco from South Africa on Nov. 22 and tested positive on Nov. 29, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.The individual, who was fully vaccinated, had mild symptoms that were improving, health officials said. The nation’s top infectious disease expert, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, said that contact tracers had identified all those who had close contact with the infected individual and that so far, all of them had tested negative for the virus.Omicron’s discovery has prompted considerable panic across the globe, with a number of countries banning flights from southern Africa, or — like Israel, Japan and Morocco — barring entry of foreign travelers altogether.But public health experts have urged caution, noting that there is as yet no firm evidence that Omicron is more dangerous than previous variants like Delta, which quickly overtook its predecessors in the United States and other countries.Omicron’s emergence is so recent that it may be a while before experts know whether it causes more severe illness. Covid hospitalizations lag new infections by two weeks or more.Scientists expect to learn much more in the coming weeks. At the moment, they say there is no reason to believe Omicron is impervious to existing vaccines, although they may turn out to be less protective to some unknown degree.There’s another reason to remain calm: Vaccine makers have expressed confidence they can tweak existing formulations to make the shots more effective against new variants.Also reassuring: Omicron’s distinctive mutations make it easy to quickly identify with a nasal swab and lab test.— Andrew Jacobs Deborah Tudhope was growing anxious. An American lawyer living in London, she was hoping to fly back to the United States in two weeks to see her 96-year-old mother, who lives in a retirement home in Maine. But the Omicron-driven travel restrictions announced on Thursday by the White House have left her worrying that the trip may not happen.Ms. Tudhope, 72, has had to reschedule her required coronavirus test for the day before her flight, which the airline had already pushed back a day. With the rules seemingly shifting by the hour, she said she faced multiple hurdles: getting out of Britain, getting into the United States and visiting her mother in the home.“I don’t know how this whole thing is going to work out,” said Ms. Tudhope, who described herself as disheartened, if not surprised, by the turmoil. “But I did make sure the flights are re-bookable.”Such private dramas are playing out all over the world, as thousands of people — Americans living abroad and foreigners hoping to visit the United States — grapple with the new complexities of holiday travel in the age of Covid.On Thursday the Biden administration shortened the time frame for international travelers to the United States to take a Covid test within a day before departure, regardless of vaccination status.That has left would-be travelers nervously calculating whether they will get test results back in time to make their flights or worrying that their home countries could impose more stringent travel bans while they are away.— Mark Landler To cancel or not to cancel. That is the question that travelers are grappling with as the Omicron variant scuttles around the world, reminding people that the pandemic roller-coaster ride is far from over. What’s different this time around is that the holiday travel season is right around the corner, and tourism, in general, has finally started to rebound.Whether the variant, which has been identified in at least 20 countries, is more severe or more transmissible than other forms of the coronavirus is likely to remain unknown for at least two weeks.Though most people are by now experienced with making high-stakes health-risk assessments in the face of incomplete information, that doesn’t make the decision about whether to travel or not easy.Courtney Niebrzydowsk, an international travel risk analyst at the University of Denver, said she urged people to ask themselves two primary questions when they were considering traveling: 1. Can this travel be postponed? and 2. How flexible can you be?She also urges people to think through all the scenarios that could emerge if they travel — like testing positive, facing a canceled return flight or learning last-minute that their destination country has expanded its quarantine requirement — and map out detailed contingency plans, including costs, missed obligations and how to approach health care. Often, she said, after going through this exercise, people have “less appetite for travel.”Jessica Herzstein, a physician who advises organizations on how to manage health risks, said that she discourages anyone who is unvaccinated or immune-compromised from traveling. She also advises travelers going to destinations with a particularly high prevalence of cases to consider canceling. For those planning to travel, Dr. Herzstein strongly advises booster shots for those eligible and to take along a supply of at-home rapid antigen tests.— Heather Murphy AURORA, Ill. — There is sobering evidence of Samantha Lewis’s struggle with long Covid on her bathroom mirror.Above the sink, she has posted a neon pink index card scrawled with nine steps (4. Wet brush 5. Toothpaste) reminding her how to brush and floss her teeth. It is one of many strategies Ms. Lewis, 34, has learned from “cognitive rehab,” an intensive therapy program for Covid-19 survivors whose lives have been upended by problems like brain fog, memory lapses, dizziness and debilitating fatigue.Nearly two years into the pandemic, advances have been made in treating Covid itself, but long Covid — a constellation of lingering health problems that some patients experience — remains little understood. Post-Covid clinics around the country are trying different approaches to help patients desperate for answers, but there is little data on outcomes so far, and doctors say it is too soon to know what might work, and for which patients.Over several months, The New York Times visited Ms. Lewis, interviewed her doctors, attended her therapy sessions and read her medical records. Before she was infected with the coronavirus in October 2020, experiencing a modest initial illness that did not require hospitalization, she was successfully juggling a demanding, detail-oriented job while raising a child with autism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. But this summer, she scored 25 on a 30-point assessment, placing her in a pre-dementia category called mild cognitive impairment.“I can feel that things are off,” she told a neurologist at Northwestern Memorial Hospital’s Neuro Covid-19 Clinic in Chicago who evaluated her and recommended cognitive rehab. “I approach a red light, my brain knows that it’s red, but it’s not reacting to the rest of my body to put my foot on the brake. Do you understand how terrifying that is?”— Pam Belluck The global pandemic response has transformed with dizzying speed since scientists in Botswana and South Africa, alarmed by dozens of mutations never seen before, started studying the Omicron variant.In just 36 hours, researchers analyzed samples from 100 infected patients, collated the data and, as Americans were enjoying Thanksgiving, alerted the world, setting off new rounds of travel restrictions and adding new uncertainty about the trajectory of a pandemic that has upended the world for almost two years.Omicron has reached more than 40 countries, though most of the cases so far have been found in arriving travelers. According to scientists in South Africa, Omicron appears to spread faster than any other variant, thanks to a combination of contagiousness and an ability to dodge the body’s immune defenses. But the contribution of each factor is not yet certain. See which countries have reported cases of the Omicron variant.International concern has not waited for a fuller picture to take shape. The World Health Organization acted with alacrity. In an emergency meeting the day after South Africa flagged the variant, the W.H.O. labeled Omicron a “variant of concern,” its most serious category, a distinction it shares with the Delta variant that emerged last spring.Even before the W.H.O. meeting was over, more than 10 countries, including the United States, had announced they would close their borders to travelers from southern Africa. Japan, Israel and Morocco went a step furthering, sealing themselves off completely to foreign travelers.The discovery of Omicron prompted a swift reconsideration of the need for booster shots. On Monday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention strengthened its guidance by urging all eligible adults to get their third shot.Vaccine makers said they were confident they could tailor existing formulas to defend against the variant, but the process was expected to take months. Scientists in South Africa reported an increase in reinfections in people who already had a bout of Covid, suggesting that the variant could overcome natural immunity.Omicron was soon found in several European countries, including the United Kingdom, as well as in Australia, Israel and Hong Kong. By Tuesday, with cases documented in at least 20 countries, health officials said the variant had been in Europe several days earlier than previously known. The first United States case of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus was reported in California on Wednesday in a San Francisco resident who had recently traveled to South Africa. Since then, it has been identified in at least 11 other states, from Hawaii to New York. Officials are bracing for more community spread, having identified at least one case stemming from domestic travel and another with no recent travel history.On Thursday, President Biden announced a broader strategy to fight the pandemic that goes beyond vaccines to underscore frequent testing as an essential mitigation tool. The new plan includes reimbursing the 150 million Americans with private insurance for at-home tests starting early next year.To ensure access for those who lack insurance, or who are covered by Medicaid, the administration intends to distribute an additional 25 million tests to community health centers and rural clinics.The president also rolled out stricter testing requirements for international fliers to the United States, requiring a negative result from a test taken within 24 hours of departure. Mask mandates for travelers were extended until mid-March.— Alexandra E. Petri At least two dozen cases of people infected with the highly mutated Omicron variant of the coronavirus had been reported in 12 states by Saturday morning.Most of the cases appeared to be people who had traveled to South Africa recently, though the infected person in Hawaii had not traveled outside of his state, and, in Minnesota, a vaccinated man who had traveled to an anime convention in New York City tested positive. Regardless, health officials were bracing for the inevitable community spread of the variant. None of the Omicron cases reported so far in the United States have resulted in serious illness, hospitalization or death.Even as concerns about the Omicron variant intensified, top federal health officials said that for now the Delta variant remained a greater threat to Americans.“I know the news is focused on Omicron, but we should remember that 99.9 percent of cases in the country right now are from the Delta variant,” Dr. Rochelle P. Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a press briefing on Friday. “Delta continues to drive cases across the country, especially in those that are unvaccinated.”About 95,000 cases were being reported in the United States every day, compared with about 12,000 per day six months ago. States in the Midwest are recording some of the biggest spikes, while New Hampshire, Michigan and Minnesota lead the country in recent cases per capita.On Friday, state health officials confirmed three cases in Maryland, all in the Baltimore area. Two of the cases are from the same household and include a vaccinated individual who had recently traveled to South Africa and an unvaccinated person who was deemed a close contact. The third case is unrelated, and the patient, who was vaccinated, has no known recent travel history.Officials in Philadelphia said that they had found one case, a man in his 30s. The sole case identified in Utah was a vaccinated individual who had just returned from South Africa. In Missouri, officials identified a case linked to domestic travel.Gov. Phil Murphy of New Jersey said that a fully vaccinated woman who had recently traveled to South Africa tested positive for the Omicron variant after being treated at an emergency department in northern New Jersey. She was in isolation with mild symptoms, officials said.On Thursday, officials in New York State announced that they had confirmed five cases of the variant: a 67-year-old woman in Suffolk County who returned from South Africa; two residents of Queens; one resident of Brooklyn; and another person in New York City who had traveled recently. The vaccination status of most of the individuals remained unknown.A vaccinated Colorado resident who had recently returned from southern Africa was that state’s first confirmed case. California reported a second case — the first being in San Francisco on Wednesday — in Los Angeles County. The infected person had been vaccinated and had traveled to South Africa in November.The authorities in Nebraska on Friday said that of the six cases involving the Omicron variant found there, only one was in a vaccinated person. One of the infected people had returned from Nigeria on Nov. 23, they said, and the other five were likely exposed through household contact. None had required hospitalization.An Oahu resident with no history of travel is the first Omicron case in Hawaii.“This is a case of community spread,” the state’s department of health said in a news release. The individual had previously been infected with the coronavirus but was never vaccinated.— Alexandra E. Petri Michigan is the latest US hotspot, with a seven-day case rate more than triple the national average as the nation struggles with yet another surge. Denver is renewing a mask mandate.Deaths in Europe from Covid-19 will reach 2.2 million by March based on current trends, the World Health Organization warned, pushing for more vaccinations. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention moved its travel advisory for Denmark and Germany to the highest level European Union officials are trying to agree on how to manage vaccine roll-outs. Germany’s top health official reiterated that the country can’t rule out any measures to contain the fourth wave, while its inoculation drive showed signs of reviving. France’s prime minister tested positive. Key developments CDC raises advisory for Denmark, Germany  The US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention moved its travel advisory for Denmark and Germany to the highest level in response to recent surges in infections across Europe. Both Denmark and Germany are ranked as Level 4, or “very high,” which means Americans should avoid all travel there, and make sure they are fully vaccinated if they do visit.New York City mayor wants MTA vaccine mandate New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio called on Governor Kathy Hochul to impose a vaccine mandate for Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) workers after he implemented requirements for all city workers.“We need them to be vaccinated for the safety of each other and their families, their communities, for the safety of the passengers,” the mayor said at a briefing on Tuesday. “It’s worked for the New York City workforce, it can work for the MTA as well.”De Blasio has been pushing for vaccinations as the city and state confront a rise in Covid-19 cases with the weather turning colder and people spending more time indoors. However, the MTA has seen a shortage of subway operators this year, which could make a vaccine mandate challenging. The state-controlled agency, which is responsible for city public transportation, is still recovering from a hiring freeze during the pandemic when ridership plummeted.Netherlands reintroduces physical distancing Maintaining a distance of 1.5m will once again become mandatory in the Netherlands starting on Wednesday as cases continue to rise. People were already encouraged to maintain social distancing, but the caretaker Dutch Cabinet said in a statement on Tuesday that the rule is now mandatory and can be enforced by police.Weekly coronavirus cases rose by 39% on Tuesday from 110,558 infections in the week prior to 153,957 infections. The national health service said the biggest spike in positive tests was reported in children up to the age of 12. Covid-19 weekly hospital admissions rose by 19% with nearly half of the admissions coming from patients aged 60 to 79.Astra plots next steps with new lab AstraZeneca will open labs for its Covid-19 products at a new UK research and development site this year as the drugmaker faces questions about the future of its vaccine in its home country.The labs, which will be based at the R&D hub in Cambridge, England, opened on Tuesday, will house a unit for vaccines and will also focus on the company’s antibody cocktail, which is expected to receive US and UK authorisation in the coming months. The UK ordered 100 million doses of Astra’s vaccine last year but ultimately limited its use to people over 40 after a very rare blood-clotting side effect emerged. Britain is only relying on vaccines from Pfizer and Moderna for its booster programme, leaving Astra on the sidelines.WHO says Europe may exceed two million deaths Deaths in Europe from Covid-19 will reach 2.2 million by March based on current trends, the World Health Organization (WHO) warned, advising countries to vaccinate more to avoid further lockdowns.Covid is now the leading cause of death in Europe, and the number of reported daily fatalities approached 4,200 last week, double the level at the end of September, the WHO said on Tuesday. The cumulative total is 1.5 million in the WHO’s European region.The WHO said it expects intensive-care units in 49 out of 53 countries in the region will have high or extreme stress between now and the start of March.Helsinki to push for remote work, use of masks Helsinki and its surrounding cities are set to recommend a return to remote working as well as extended mask use as cases mount.When remote work isn’t possible, employers should require mask use at workplaces even if social distancing is possible, a group that drafts recommendations for municipal authorities said in an emailed statement. Mask use will be recommended in all public indoor spaces and public transport, including schools starting at the age of 12.The recommendations will be in place until January 16.Zoom tumbles on signs of slowing growth Zoom Video Communications shares were down about 12% on Tuesday morning after the video-conferencing company reported a smaller-than-projected number of large customers for a second straight quarter, stoking concerns about growth as more workplaces and schools open back up.Germans line up at vaccine centres Germany’s sluggish vaccine campaign is rattling back to life, with many snapping up online appointments for shots and others enduring hours of lines in the cold to receive more protection against the coronavirus.Some are taking to Twitter to voice frustration, elation or both at the surge in demand for shots. Comments thanked those hardy enough to brave the elements for a shot, while others criticised authorities for not better organizing the latest inoculation push. Poland reports rise in hospitalisations The number of hospitalised Covid-19 patients in Poland rose by 962 to 18,320, the Health Ministry reported on Tuesday, the biggest daily increase since April. The number of patients requiring ventilation rose by 35 to 1,551.Countries mull over stricter measures, compulsory shots Slovakia’s ruling parties took a step closer to imposing a stricter lockdown, which the country’s prime minister said may be needed to contain one of the world’s worst outbreaks.Premier Eduard Heger said he’s “intensely” considering mirroring steps taken in neighbouring Austria. The three-party coalition late on Monday agreed in principle to tighten the restrictions, but needs to finalise the details, the SITA news service reported on Tuesday.Separately, the Czech government is considering mandatory vaccination for people over age 60, as well as healthcare and social-care workers, the outgoing prime minister, Andrej Babis, said. The government is waiting for an opinion from the health ministry due next week, Babis said.Europe seeks common stance European Union countries pushed for an agreement on how long vaccinations protect people and how to manage booster shots as they try to counter the pandemic’s fourth wave and safeguard free travel.“We need to agree on a common rule for when vaccines expire, and when the booster should be administered,” Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn told reporters on Tuesday as European affairs ministers met in Brussels. “That can’t be different in Luxembourg to how it is in Greece or in Germany or in France. That’s totally against the interests of European citizens.”Austria lockdown may cost €1.2-billion a weekAustria’s latest efforts to curb the pandemic may cost as much as €1.2-billion a week and force some 400,000 workers onto a government-subsidised job programme.Government officials said they’re assessing the fallout after the €380-billion economy becoming the first country in western Europe to reimpose lockdown measures.  French prime minister tests positive French Prime Minister Jean Castex tested positive for Covid-19 as a new wave of cases spreads across Europe. Castex will be isolating for 10 days, his office said.Although France hasn’t put new restrictions in place like Austria and Germany, the latest wave is hitting the country “at a blazing speed”, government spokesman Gabriel Attal said on Sunday. President Emmanuel Macron’s government is reinforcing health-pass checks in enclosed areas and this week will discuss opening up its booster-shot campaign to more adults, he said.Italy shortens recommended booster timing Italy will now recommend booster shots after five months instead of six, the country’s health minister, Roberto Speranza, said on Facebook on Monday evening. This week the government may also consider regional leaders’ proposals to impose fewer restrictions on vaccinated people.Health Minister says Germany can’t rule out lockdown German Health Minister Jens Spahn reiterated that the country couldn’t rule out any measures, including lockdown, amid a spike in Covid cases Chancellor Angela Merkel has called worse than anything Germany has experienced so far. Some regions are in a “very, very dramatic” situation, Spahn told DLF Radio in an interview. Merkel told officials from her CDU party on Monday that hospitals would soon be overwhelmed unless the fourth wave of the virus is broken, according to a person familiar with her remarks.  Goldman sees more curbs in euro economies Goldman Sachs Group economists predicted that the newest Covid surge will lead to “additional targeted restrictions” in the euro area’s four biggest economies – but they expect blanket national lockdowns to be avoided.That points to a hit to the euro-area economy of 0.2 percentage points in both the final quarter of this year and the first three months of 2022, economists said in a note to clients. The impact on Germany will be worse than that in Italy and Spain, they said.Their downside scenario, with a repeat of last winter’s lockdowns, sees a 1.4% cumulative decline in euro-area output. The note comes as Europe moves again toward restrictions to curb infections that threaten to overwhelm health systems.Lam addresses Hong Kong-China border reopening Hong Kong’s border with China won’t fully reopen before a December 19 vote in the local legislature, the city’s Chief Executive, Carrie Lam, told a briefing. Hong Kong and Chinese government representatives will meet in the mainland border city of Shenzhen on Thursday to further discuss a quarantine-free travel plan between the two sides, Lam added. Hong Kong and China are currently the last major Covid Zero holdouts, imposing tough restrictions on inbound travellers, and reopening the border with the mainland is a key priority for Lam’s government. DM– With assistance from Jinshan Hong, Anuchit Nguyen, Andreo Calonzo, Felix Tam, Joyce Koh, Iain Rogers, Zoe Schneeweiss, April Roach, Fiona Rutherford and Vincent Del Giudice."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receive
                                            The Beer Association of South Africa wants past bans declared irrational, invalid and set aside.
                                        CAPE TOWN - The Beer Association of South Africa has approached the courts to get more information from government on alcohol sale bans imposed throughout the COVID-19 lockdown.It's unclear if COVID-19 restrictions will be tightened, including another ban on liquor sales, as cases are rising.The association has reiterated that previous  bans had a devastating impact on the industry.It claims that more than R42 billion had been lost in retail sales and the curbs had led to a R60 billion  loss to the GDP.The association has launched a review application of previous alcohol bans.The application focuses on government's decision to enforce bans in July and December 2020 as well as June 2021, and the move to continue imposing further restrictions on the trade of liquor during July 2021.It wants past bans declared irrational, invalid and set aside.It said that with  no evidence having been provided by government to support its decisions to enforce the measure, the application argues that the state had failed to take into account the devastating impact  on the alcohol industry.The association said if another alcohol sales ban was to be imposed at a  time when the tourism and hospitality sectors were trying to recover, it would be  the final nail in the coffin for thousands of businesses.







Germany is seeking to break a surge in coronavirus infections; Biden announces plan for boosters for 100 million Americans
Léonie Chao-Fong (now); 
Lucy Campbell, 
Martin Belam and 
Samantha Lock (earlier)

        
            Fri 3 Dec 2021 00.46 GMT



            First published on Thu 2 Dec 2021 00.49 GMT




12.46am GMT
00:46

That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, reporting from Sydney, Australia. Thanks for following along – this blog is now closed. You can catch up with the latest coronavirus coverage by following our new blog here.

11.55pm GMT
23:55

Updated
            at 12.04am GMT


11.31pm GMT
23:31

New US rules requiring international air travellers to obtain a negative Covid-19 test within one day of travel will take effect Monday at 12:01am ET (0501 GMT), sources briefed on the matter said, Reuters reports. Under current rules, vaccinated international air travellers can present a negative test result obtained within three days from their point of departure.Unvaccinated travellers currently must get a negative Covid-19 test within one day of departure.

11.21pm GMT
23:21

German health authorities reported the first confirmed case of the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus in the capital Berlin, only days after several cases were detected in southern states.Dilek Kalayci, health senator in the state government of Berlin, said there were also several more suspected cases of the new Omicron strain in the city of 3.6 million people.So far, little is known about the new variant, but there is a risk of a further spike in infections due to a faster spread of the virus, Kalayci said in a tweet. “My plea: Reduce contacts! Keep distance! Wear a mask!”, she added.On Wednesday, the public health office in the southern state of Baden-Wuerttemberg said four people had tested positive for the Omicron variant even though they were fully vaccinated against the coronavirus. They had only mild symptoms.Updated
            at 11.26pm GMT


11.18pm GMT
23:18

New York state has just recorded 5 cases of the Omicron variant, local news outlet WABC reports. We’ll have more on this as the story develops. The news comes after a man who attended an anime convention in New York City in late November tested positive for the Omicron variant when he returned home to Minnesota, marking the second case of the variant in the US and leading officials Thursday to urge thousands of convention attendees to get tested.The Anime NYC 2021 convention Nov. 19-21 drew about 50,000 people, according to event organisers, and attendees were required to wear masks and show proof of having received at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine.Updated
            at 11.23pm GMT


11.09pm GMT
23:09

 Hi everyone, it’s Samantha Lock here, ready to take you through all the Covid news this Friday. As usual, some numbers out of Australia for you. The state of New South Wales has recorded 337 new locally acquired Covid cases today and no deaths.Numbers are also out in Victoria, which has recorded 1,188 new locally acquired cases, a drop on yesterday’s numbers. The state also recorded 11 deaths overnight.Federal health minister Greg Hunt has said all the Omicron cases in Australia have been “asymptomatic or very mild”.Hunt was on the TV morning programme Sunrise, saying authorities were “cautiously optimistic”.

11.07pm GMT
23:07

Senior NHS leaders have warned the only way to meet the UK government’s January booster vaccine deadline will be to reduce or cancel routine care, The Independent reports.Plans to invite all adults for a booster jab by the end of January were announced on Monday, but healthcare providers have yet to be told how the NHS is expected to ramp up vaccination services.One NHS trust leader said the only way to hit the deadline would be “to stop less essential and more routine work” at a time when waiting lists are already at records levels.The National Audit Office (NAO) warned on Wednesday that the backlog for NHS care could reach anywhere between 7 million and 12 million by early 2025.Another senior trust leader said: “We don’t have enough staff to manage the vaccination we have now, it will lead to a massive additional load of work. The chances are it will take staff away from the services we’re still struggling to get running.”

10.46pm GMT
22:46

Ministers in the UK have clashed repeatedly over advice on festivities and mistletoe, with Home Office staff being urged to limit numbers attending Christmas parties in the office and the health secretary contradicting a cabinet colleague to insist “people can snog who they wish”.Amid concerns over the Omicron variant, the government was accused of sending mixed messages about whether people should change their behaviour in the festive period despite no laws prohibiting social contact between healthy people.Sajid Javid became the latest to weigh in, contradicting the work and pensions secretary Thérèse Coffey’s warning against kissing strangers under the mistletoe.Meanwhile, guidance issued to civil servants in the Home Office on Wednesday, seen by the Guardian, said they could celebrate with colleagues, but urged people to “take sensible precautions”.Read the full report here:

9.47pm GMT
21:47

The Omicron variant appears to be reinfecting people at three times the rate of previous strains, experts in South Africa have said.According to new evidence collected by the country’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD), the latest epidemiological evidence suggests that Omicron can evade immunity from infection with earlier variants and is causing reinfections at three times previous rates.“We believe that previous infection does not provide protection from Omicron,” said Anne von Gottberg, an expert at the NICD.Scientists from the same institute have said initial data suggests that Omicron may provoke less severe illness than previous variants although that may be skewed by the fact that many of the first Omicron cases have been identified in younger individuals or detected in very recently screened travellers.In mid-November South Africa was reporting about 300 Covid cases a day. On Wednesday, it reported 8,561 new cases, up from 4,373 the day before and 2,273 on Monday.Read the full story here: 

8.39pm GMT
20:39

Health officials in the state of Colorado have identified a case in a woman who recently travelled to southern Africa, according to local media.The Colorado department of public health and environment reported that the patient had been vaccinated, had mild symptoms and was recovering at home, KKTV reports. Colorado is the third state in the US to identify an Omicron case, after California on Wednesday and Minnesota earlier today. Updated
            at 8.50pm GMT


8.31pm GMT
20:31

Here’s more on the second confirmed Omicron case in the United States, after the first was recorded in California on Wednesday.Health officials said a case had also been found in an adult man who attended an anime convention in New York City in late November. The man, who had been vaccinated, tested positive after returning home to Minnesota and sought Covid testing after showing mild symptoms on 22 November.Officials in New York said they were working to trace those who attended the Anime NYC 2021 convention, held from 19 to 21 November at the city’s Jacob K Javits convention centre. Vaccinations were required for the event.Governor Kathy Hochul said there were no confirmed Omicron cases among New York residents, but mayor Bill de Blasio said in a statement that “we should assume” there is community spread of Omicron in the city.Updated
            at 8.51pm GMT


8.15pm GMT
20:15

Two more cases of the Omicron variant have been recorded in Brazil, the ministry of health said, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to five. The two new cases are two people who boarded in South Africa, passed through Ethiopia, landed in Guarulhos, and finally arrived in Brasilia.One individual has mild symptoms of the disease and the other is asymptomatic.There are still eight investigations in progress.

8.04pm GMT
20:04

Google is pushing back its return-to-office date for offices in Europe, the Middle East and Africa because of concerns over the Omicron variant, Business Insider reports, citing a memo it obtained.Employees were previously told they would be expected in offices on 10 January in a new hybrid work format, with offices in different countries and locations to determine for themselves when to return beyond that date depending on local conditions.In the memo, Google’s president for the EMEA region, Matt Brittin, reportedly said the company would postpone that deadline beyond 10 January. No guidance has yet been issued to US or North American employees regarding changes in the return-to-office plan.The US economy’s fate remains tied to the pandemic, which is worsening again around the globe. Minneapolis Fed president Neel Kashkari said fear of the virus is deterring people from returning to work, while Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen blamed the pandemic for accelerating inflation. Austria is putting unvaccinated people under lockdown starting on Monday for at least 10 days in a dramatic move to stem the spread of the virus. New infections spread to almost two million in Europe last week, the most since the pandemic started. In Germany, leaders plan to require companies to allow employees to work from home when possible and made urgent pleas for wider vaccine uptake. Key developments Yellen says controlling Covid key to easing inflation Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said controlling Covid-19 in the US is the key to easing inflation.“It’s important to realise that the cause of this inflation is the pandemic,” Yellen said on CBS’s Face the Nation on Sunday. “If we want to get inflation down, I think continuing to make progress against the pandemic is the most important thing we can do,” she said.Chris Christie recounts phone call with Trump in book When Donald Trump and Chris Christie were both hospitalised with Covid-19 in late 2020 after spending time together, the former president called the former New Jersey governor with one main concern.“Are you gonna say you got it from me?” Trump asked him, according to a new book by Christie, which was cited by The New York Times.Christie also wrote that his priest visited him in the hospital to pray over him. In an CNN interview to be aired on Monday, Christie said he is unsure whether he or Trump will run for presidency again and he doesn’t want to make predictions about 2024.Virus fear is holding US back, says Neel Kashkari Getting Americans back to work depends on bringing the Covid-19 pandemic under control, Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari said.“What’s keeping people on the sidelines – we think it’s fear of the virus, the delta wave and the continued spread,” Kashkari said on CBS’s Face the Nation. Getting the pandemic “really under control” will give people the confidence to return to work, helping the US economic recovery and bringing down inflation, he said.Fire kills three in Bulgarian Covid ward Three patients died after a fire broke out in a Covid-19 ward at a hospital in southern Bulgaria, the Associated Press reported. Hospitals are under strain in Bulgaria, where the virus is surging and which has one of the lowest rates of vaccination in Europe. US official says Covid limits freedoms US Surgeon General Vivek Murthy strongly defended federal vaccine mandates, likening them to speed limits on roads.“Sometimes our decisions do affect other people,” Murthy said on Fox News Sunday. “How fast we drive affects the safety of others.”“While freedom is absolutely important, we also have a collective responsibility to one another when our decisions do impact the health and well being of others,” he said.He said vaccination rates rose by an average of 20% in organisations that required shots.Austria announces lockdown for unvaccinated Austria announced a lockdown for unvaccinated people for at least 10 days as coronavirus cases spike to record levels from Monday until at least November 24. Only about 65% of Austrians are fully vaccinated, one of the lowest rates in Western Europe.Austria’s seven-day average of Covid cases has more than doubled this month to more than 10,000, and its recent rate of infection is among the highest in the world. A record 13,152 cases were reported on Saturday. The seven-day infection rate of 775 new cases per 100,000 people is well above 289 in neighbouring Germany.Czech Republic cases rise The Czech Republic recorded 9,161 new Covid-19 cases in 24 hours through Saturday, up by 3,400 from a week ago, according to the health ministry data. The nation of 10.7 million people reported more than 10,000 daily cases for four consecutive days this week. The outgoing government of Prime Minister Andrej Babis plans to announce new measures to stem the spread on Monday but is seeking agreement on curbs with the future Cabinet led by the Civic Democrats.Swiss boosters for everyone A third vaccination will have to be extended to the general population in the near future, Swiss President Guy Parmelin said in an interview with local paper NZZ am Sonntag. Switzerland currently recommends booster shots for people over 65 years old.  Germany to require remote work option Due to a recent surge in Covid cases, the three parties negotiating to form Germany’s next government plan to require companies to allow office workers to work from home where possible, Handelsblatt newspaper reported.Germany recorded another 33,498 coronavirus infections in the 24 hours through Sunday morning, taking the total since the start of the pandemic above five million, according to data from the RKI public-health institute. The number of deaths rose by 55 to 97,672, while the seven-day incidence rate climbed to 289.Cathay tightens crew measures Cathay Pacific Airways said it will move its crew to a different hotel in Frankfurt after a pilot arriving from the German city to Hong Kong tested positive for Covid-19, the South China Morning Post reported. The airline will suspend layovers in the city as soon as possible, according to the report, and compliance checks at overseas stations will also be increased. China’s strict policies to stay China reiterated the need to aggressively quash domestic Covid-19 infections, measures which extended to at least one pet while its owner was away. The dog in Shangrao city in eastern Jiangxi province received “non-hazardous treatment” before its death, according to a government statement.Thailand tourists return  Thailand’s Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-Ocha said he is satisfied with almost 40,000 foreign tourists entering Thailand between November 1-12 after the nation’s reopening. Bangkok will allow internet cafes and game centres to reopen from November 16 as daily new infections have fallen below 10,000 daily cases since late October, compared with the peak of 20,000 daily cases in August.Australia to begin vaccinating young children Australia could begin its roll-out of Covid-19 vaccines for children aged 5-11 in January, the Sydney Morning Herald reported.In the clearest signal yet from the government for a start date, Covid-19 Task Force Commander Lieutenant General John Frewen said doses of the Pfizer vaccine had been secured but aren’t yet in the country. US weekly vaccinations highest since May The US administered almost 10 million vaccine doses in the last week, the most since late May, the White House said on Saturday. By Wednesday, about 900,000 shots had been given to young children. Booster shots are outpacing first doses by far. Meanwhile, new US infections for the week that ended Friday were the highest in more than a month, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University and Bloomberg. Daily deaths also increased slightly in the week that ended Friday compared with the previous seven days. Fatalities are almost 40% less than in early October.  Singapore eases rules on vaccine records for US travellers Singapore eased its rules for vaccination records for travellers from the US The city-state will now accept a physical vaccination card along with a letter from the provider of the inoculation, the Straits Times reported.The move came after travellers from the US were served quarantine notices when they arrived in Singapore because their vaccination records weren’t recognised. DM– With assistance from Jessica Sui, Marion Halftermeyer, Lenka Ponikelska, Ros Krasny, Jonathan Tirone and Yueqi Yang."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receiveBelgium reimposed a work-from-home requirement and mandated new masking requirements as daily case rates rose, while Spain approved boosters for vulnerable populations.Meanwhile, the Biden administration said it would offer drugmakers funding to expand annual domestic production capacity of mRNA vaccines.An adviser to China’s government said he hoped the country would gradually loosen its strict approach to battling the coronavirus after Beijing hosts the 2022 Winter Olympics.Key developmentsBelgium mandates working from home Belgium reinstated a requirement for people to work from home four days a week into mid-December, despite opposition from business groups. The country also extended mandatory mask wearing to 10-year-olds and will mandate indoor mask wearing even in venues where access is regulated by a Covid pass. With an average number of daily cases above 10,000, Belgium has one of the highest per-capita case rates in Western Europe.The government and regions resisted calls from experts to shut down nightlife. Belgium’s high vaccination rate, 75% of the population, is the main reason the government was able to avoid imposing a new lockdown, Prime Minister Alexander de Croo said.Spain approves boosters as case rate rises Spain said it would roll out booster shots to health workers and people older than 60 and will discuss the initiative with authorities in autonomous regions.Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez said the country’s vaccination rate of about 80% had shielded the former hotspot from the worst of the latest wave of the pandemic. Spain’s 14-day average infection rate climbed 67% in two weeks to 82 cases per 100,000 inhabitants, but remained well below that of countries including Germany and Austria, where less than 70% of the population is vaccinated. Swiss voters set to support passes The majority of Swiss favour Covid-19 certificates for access to indoor spaces and events as Europe battles a winter surge in infections.Some 61% of voters back a law that would permit the mandatory use of the certificates, according to a poll for broadcaster SRG. About 38% were against it, while 1% remained undecided. The vote on the referendum, which also covers financial pandemic relief, takes place November 28.White House seeks to speed up future vaccines A White House offer to help drugmakers increase domestic production could go toward addressing another pandemic, officials said.“This programme would also help us produce doses within six to nine months of identification of a future pathogen and ensure enough vaccines for all Americans,” Jeff Zients, President Joe Biden’s Covid-19 response coordinator, said at a briefing.The administration is seeking to gauge interest from pharmaceutical companies, and no deal has been completed.New York City to double size of mobile testing fleet New York City will roughly double the size of its mobile testing fleet to 70 vans, Mayor Bill de Blasio said. “We want to emphasise testing is very, very important to this next phase as we try to put the Covid era behind us,” he said in a briefing.Cases are rising in the city as the weather cools and the holidays approach. Early in the week, the mayor opened up booster shots to all adults. About 42,000 New Yorkers received boosters on Monday and Tuesday, according to the city.Health Commissioner Dave Chokshi advised New Yorkers, including those who are vaccinated, to get tested before attending gatherings and travelling.Hungary’s doctors warn of deadly Christmas Doctors in Hungary called on Prime Minister Viktor Orban to introduce tough curbs to stop a fourth wave that is overwhelming hospitals and leading to alarming death rates. The country registered more than 10,000 new daily infections, according to data published on Wednesday, the highest level since a record reached on March 26. Daily coronavirus-related deaths surged to almost a seven-month high.Authorities need to expand a mask mandate to cover all indoor spaces, ban large events, support work-from-home arrangements and make entry to non-essential places such as restaurants and theatres hinge on carrying vaccination certificates, the Hungarian Chamber of Doctors said. Masks currently are required only on public transportation.“Let’s work together to slow the rise in the number of patients that’s overwhelming hospitals, otherwise a lot of families will have a very sad Christmas,” the chamber said.US to fund vaccine output boost The White House will offer drug manufacturers, including Pfizer and Moderna, funding to expand annual domestic production capacity of mRNA vaccines by one billion doses by the second half of next year.The plan, described by officials familiar with the matter ahead of an announcement on Wednesday, is aimed at increasing availability of Covid-19 vaccines and building capacity to address any future pandemic. The move could see the US consolidate more production of vaccines on its home soil. EU regulator starts evaluating Novavax shot The European Medicines Agency has started evaluating Novavax’s application for conditional marketing authorisation for its Covid-19 vaccine. The assessment will proceed under an accelerated timeline, and an opinion on the authorisation could be issued within weeks.French official cites fifth wave French government spokesman Gabriel Attal told reporters after a cabinet meeting that France “has entered a fifth wave of the epidemic with a rising number of infections,” and said the country was “on alert.” He added that France is in a better situation than neighboring countries thanks to the so-called health pass, which makes vaccination effectively necessary to resume a normal life. Croatia weighs sanctions over Covid Croatia is considering sanctions for people in violation of the government’s rules to fight the pandemic, including for those who incite civil disobedience over the measures, Prime Minister Andrej Plenkovic told the Cabinet. The European Union member in recent weeks has been one of the hardest-hit nations, along with Slovenia and Estonia.Malaysia approves boosters Malaysia granted conditional approval for the use of Sinovac and AstraZeneca vaccines as Covid booster doses to individuals aged 40 years and above, Health Director-General Noor Hisham Abdullah said in a tweet. Previously, only the Pfizer-BioNTech shot had received conditional approval for use as a booster.Summer flu in South Africa blamed on Covid An unusual outbreak of influenza in South Africa’s summer months is probably due to the relaxation of pandemic restrictions and a drop in immunity following a two-year hiatus in flu cases because of such curbs, the National Institute for Communicable Diseases said. The number of influenza cases detected more than tripled in the week ended November 7 from 10 weeks earlier, the agency said on Wednesday.Beijing tightens curbs Beijing is tightening restrictions further, even after China’s outbreak receded to fewer than 10 new daily infections. Authorities in the capital have asked residents living in districts that have reported infections to avoid leaving the city unless necessary. Local entertainment venues will deny entry to people from anywhere in the country with a Covid case in the past two weeks, in addition to operating at 75% of capacity.Germany delays some Covax donations Germany has delayed donations to Covax, the World Health Organization-backed programme to distribute vaccines around the world, to ensure sufficient supply for its booster campaign, Health Minister Jens Spahn said. Some Covax donations planned for December are now being pushed to January and February, Spahn said. Glaxo to supply US with Covid treatment GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology will supply $1-billion worth of doses of their antibody treatment to the US in the next month. The companies announced a contract on Wednesday that brings the number of doses ordered to 750,000 worldwide. The medicine, sotrovimab, can prevent Covid patients from becoming severely ill.Malaysia cases climb before polls New cases in Malaysia rose above the 6,000 mark for the first time in five days and the reproduction factor of the virus edged above the key threshold of one, raising concerns about a worsening outbreak heading into state elections in Malacca and Sarawak.German cases surge Germany reported another record increase in cases, and the seven-day incidence rate climbed to a new high. There were 52,826 new cases in the 24 hours through early Wednesday, the incidence rate rose to 319.5, and a further 294 people died from Covid-19, the most in more than six months.With the country’s fourth wave spreading, and the inoculation campaign in stasis, the head of Germany’s vaccination committee, Thomas Mertens, signalled that it might update its advice on who should get Covid booster shots. The recommendation could be extended to people aged 18 or older, instead of the current one which focuses on elderly people or those most at risk, he said late on Tuesday.Record infections in Czech Republic The Czech Republic had a record number of new cases on Tuesday. The country of 10.7 million people reported 22,479 new infections, almost double from a week ago. The outgoing government of Prime Minister Andrej Babis is meeting Thursday to debate how to stem the spread. Philippines clears Novavax shot The Philippine Food and Drug Administration allowed the emergency use of Novavax’s vaccine, according to the regulator’s head, Eric Domingo. The shot, under the brand name Covovax, will be manufactured by the Serum Institute of India. The country also has allowed colleges and universities in the capital and other areas under the three lowest alert levels to hold in-person classes. Only fully vaccinated teachers and students can attend, and classrooms will be at half capacity.Air travel in the Philippines is seeing signs of recovery as local restrictions on movement are relaxed, even as the country remains shut off to foreign tourists.Japan considers Pfizer shots for children Japan plans to start administering Pfizer’s vaccine to those under 12 years old in February if experts approve, broadcaster NHK reported, without saying where it got the information. The ministry has told local governments to be prepared for the roll-out.Hong Kong Disneyland closed Hong Kong Disneyland was closed on Wednesday to ensure that staff can complete testing sooner, the park said on its website after it was put on the government’s mandatory test list. Visitors and staff members who were at the park between 11am and 6pm on November 14 are required to be tested by Thursday after the park had been visited by preliminary positive imported cases.China’s infections fall China reported eight infections on Wednesday, all in one province, as the country’s new cases dropped to single digits for the first time in its latest delta outbreak. All of the locally transmitted cases were found in northeastern Liaoning province, according to the National Health Commission. The number of new infections has fallen for three consecutive days, after peaking at more than 100 daily during the broadest outbreak it’s experienced since Covid first emerged two years ago.China adviser urges teamwork Henry Wang Huiyao, an adviser to China’s State Council and founder of an influential Chinese think-tank, said a closer collaboration between Washington, Beijing and the World Health Organization could help open up the country. China has largely isolated itself as it follows a “Covid Zero” approach to suppressing the virus.“There’s a lack of leadership on the global fighting of the pandemic,” said Wang, president of the Center for China & Globalization. “There’s a need for having that so we can facilitate travel, the movement of people, and even for Chinese government officials to visit other countries.” DM– With assistance from Zoltan Simon and Elaine Chen."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receiveBusinessTechSouth Africa, which is contending with a massive upsurge in coronavirus infections following the onset of the omicron variant, is readying a mandatory vaccine policy and is set to implement it early next year, a senior labor union official said.Broad agreement has been reached on the policy in the National Economic Development and Labor Council, a negotiating forum, although some details have yet to be ironed out.The Congress of South African Trade Unions, the country’s biggest labour group, which initially opposed forcing people to get inoculated, has now joined business groups in backing the move.“Getting to a 90% vaccination rate is in the interest of our members,”  Matthew Parks, the parliamentary coordinator for Cosatu, which forms part of Nedlac, said in an interview. “We can save their lives and their jobs. What we not going to do is support further lockdowns when we have lost two million jobs.”South Africa has detected almost 3 million coronavirus infections so far and nearly 90,000 of those who were diagnosed with the disease have died — although excess deaths data indicates the actual toll is about three times higher. New cases have soared since last week as omicron took hold in the country.About 36% of the adult population has been vaccinated so far and despite an ample supply of shots being available, hesitancy to take them remains high. On Nov. 26, President Cyril Ramaphosa flagged that the government was considering introducing mandatory vaccines for some activities and locations, and said a task team is looking into the matter.“If a person chooses not to be vaccinated, they cannot also choose to engage in social activities that place others at risk,” Mondli Gungubele, a minister in the Presidency, said in a column in Johannesburg’s Business Day newspaper on Wednesday.“We are at a crucial turning point in our response to the pandemic. We cannot afford further restrictions on economic activity or the uncertain pendulum swings that have characterized lockdowns in the past.”Discovery, the owner of South Africa’s largest health-insurance administrator, and other firms have already made it compulsory for their workers to be vaccinated and seen uptake of the shots surge as a result.While Cosatu’s affiliates were split over whether to compel workers to get vaccinated, its leadership decided that the pros outweighed the cons.The Public Servants Association, which is South Africa’s biggest public sector union and isn’t part of Cosatu, as well as three other unions opposed mandatory shots.Parks warned that there was a risk of unrest should the government force people to get inoculated. France, the Netherlands and several other nations who have sought to introduce mandatory vaccines have been rocked by violent protests.“We have raised it with government that when it comes into effect they will need to make sure the police are on alert, we don’t need anyone misbehaving,” he said. “People can protest but we can’t tolerate burning of restaurants and schools and so on.”Rioting engulfed South Africa’s Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal provinces in July. It was triggered by the jailing of former President Jacob Zuma following his conviction on contempt of court charges. That violence claimed 354 lives and saw thousands of businesses looted and destroyed.Read: Reinfection from Omicron three times higher than for any previous variantComments section policy:
                                            Almost 23 million doses have been administered since the mass inoculation campaign got under way.


                                        CAPE TOWN - Government's coronavirus vaccines stats are showing a drop in uptake over the past week. Almost 23 million doses have been administered since the mass inoculation campaign got under way. This comes as an expected fourth wave of infections looms. Dr Jo Barnes - from Stellenbosch University's department of global health - has once again pleaded with people to get vaccinated against COVID-19.“Unvaccinated people have five times the risk of infection and if you do get infected, a 20 times higher risk of dying from complications.”Barnes said it was proven that vaccinations work.“The vaccines really work, so please try to overcome your fear and get vaccinated. It’s not only for yourself, but for your community and our economy.”South Africa's fourth wave is forecast to begin as early as this month. 





The European Union’s drug regulator has recommended the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine for children aged five to 11. Separately, the EU plans to limit vaccine validity for travel purposes to nine months, signalling the need for boosters. Germany passed 100,000 Covid deaths, with new infections still rising and hospitals in some cities becoming overwhelmed.Governments around Europe, the pandemic’s epicentre again, are considering reintroducing measures to curb the resurgence of the virus, including compulsory shots in Germany, restrictions for unvaccinated people in Italy, and mask mandates in Denmark. Portugal will require remote working after the holidays. Scientists in South Africa are studying a recently identified new coronavirus variant of concern, stoking fears the country may face a potentially severe fourth wave that could spread internationally.Key developments France tightens travel rules France will strengthen rules for incoming travellers who aren’t vaccinated or are coming from countries with high rates of Covid-19 or virus variants, Health Minister Olivier Veran said on Thursday in a TF1 television interview.The government earlier announced booster shots would be made more widely available and masks mandatory. Veran also said health passes and testing would be required at ski resorts in a bid to keep them open this season after lifts were shut for part of last season.France has reported a surge in new daily cases in recent weeks, reaching 33,464 on Thursday.Portugal requires post-holiday work-from-home The Portuguese government said remote working will be mandatory in the week of January 2-9 as it tries to prevent a spike in coronavirus infections after the Christmas and New Year holiday break.Schools will reopen on January 10, a week later than previously planned, Prime Minister Antonio Costa said on Thursday at a press conference in Lisbon. Until that first week of January, remote working will be recommended when possible.From December, the use of masks will become mandatory in closed spaces, digital certificates will be needed to access restaurants and negative tests will be required for nightclubs and bars. Masks are currently already required on public transport. South Africa warns on new variant Scientists in South Africa are studying a recently identified new coronavirus variant of concern, stoking fears the country may face a potentially severe fourth wave that could spread internationally.The new discovery, called B.1.1529 until a Greek letter is assigned, carries an unusually large number of mutations and is “clearly very different” from previous incarnations, Tulio de Oliveira, a bioinformatics professor who runs gene-sequencing institutions at two South African universities, said at a briefing on Thursday.  “Here is a mutation variant of serious concern,” Health Minister Joe Phaahla said at the same media event. Virologists have detected almost 100 cases linked to the variant in the country to date. Worrying variant of coronavirus, with many unknown mutations, driving resurgence of infections in GautengCzechs tighten curbs without lockdown The outgoing Czech government tightened social-distancing measures to stem a record spike in Covid-19 infections but refrained from declaring a hard lockdown imposed in neighbouring Austria and Slovakia.The Cabinet ordered restaurants, clubs and bars to close at 10pm and imposed limits for attendance at public events, Health Minister Adam Vojtech said on Thursday. As some hospitals are already overrun with patients, Vojtech expects new coronavirus cases to continue rising and sees the current wave culminating at around Christmas. Study shows Moderna most effective The Moderna and Russian Sputnik V Covid-19 vaccines both edged the version from Pfizer and BioNTech in effectiveness in a large-scale study of five different immunisation shots conducted by Hungarian researchers.Moderna’s vaccine was 88.7% effective in protecting against coronavirus infection and 93.6% effective against Covid-related mortality, compared with 85.7% and 95.4%, respectively for Sputnik, according to the paper published on Wednesday on the website of the Clinical Microbiology and Infection medical journal. Pfizer came in third with 83.3% and 90.6%, respectively. Singapore cases slow Singapore reported the lowest number of cases found in the community since September 25, according to the Ministry of Health. The city-state detected a total of 1,275 new infections as of noon on Thursday, down from 2,079 on the previous day.Outbreak hits Vermont nursing home An outbreak at a Vermont nursing home has infected 70 people and left two dead, the Bennington Banner reported. More than 186,000 residents and staff at US long-term care facilities have died since the start of the pandemic, according to AARP, though vaccines have considerably slowed the spread among the elderly. Belgium to evaluate new restrictions Belgium’s federal and regional governments will meet on Friday for an evaluation of virus restrictions enacted less than a week ago, Prime Minister Alexander De Croo told lawmakers in Parliament in Brussels on Thursday.Health Minister Frank Vandenbroucke said in Parliament he will plead for immediate measures in schools, in people’s private life and in industries, without elaborating.Denmark opens boosters to all adults Denmark has expanded its official guidelines to include re-vaccination of all adults, the Danish Health Authority said on Thursday. Every Dane over the age of 18 will now be invited to get a booster shot, six months after receiving the second shot. The invitation had until now only been given to people above the age of 65, health staff, people with chronic diseases and those who initially were vaccinated with the Johnson & Johnson shot. Finland curbs bars and restaurants Finland’s government is preparing to stop alcohol sales after 5pm in bars and restaurants, telling them to close at 6pm, unless the establishments require patrons to provide a Covid certificate. Cafes and fast-food restaurants could operate without requiring the corona passport.Vaccine in pregnancy showed no effect on babies The rate of stillbirth or low birthweight in babies born to the more than 24,000 vaccinated mothers who delivered between January and August was the same as those in unvaccinated women, according to data released by the UK Health Security Agency on Thursday. The number of premature births was also similar.Babies born to women vaccinated against Covid-19 in England showed no difference in birth outcomes, bolstering the safety profile of the shots during pregnancy.EU regulator clears Pfizer vaccine for children aged five to 11 The EU’s drug regulator approved use of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine for children aged five to 11, saying the benefits outweigh the risks. The two-shot regimen for younger kids is one-third the dose that’s given to those 12 and older. The current wave of the pandemic in Europe has increasingly affected children, either because they’re directly infected or because of school and day-care classes sent into quarantine. Though Covid doesn’t usually hit children as hard as it does adults, it can spread via children to more vulnerable people. It will probably take a few weeks to ship the lower-dose shots for children, Germany’s health minister said earlier this week, before the agency’s recommendation.France recommends boosters for all adults France is rolling out booster shots to all adults as it seeks to tackle the epidemic wave, Health Minister Olivier Veran told a news conference in Paris on Thursday.The length of time between primary vaccination and a booster shot will be shortened to five months from six, in line with recommendations from the country’s health authority.Daily coronavirus cases are surging in France, rising above 30,000 for the past two days. “This fifth wave will be unquestionably stronger and longer than the fourth wave,” Veran said, but no new lockdowns or curfews are planned.Shanghai reports new cases China’s financial hub Shanghai reported three local Covid-19 infections. Three residential blocks have been classified as medium-risk areas, just after the country had managed to quell the widest outbreak of the virus since it emerged two years ago. Hangzhou, a city that’s just one hour by high-speed train from Shanghai, also reported two asymptomatic cases. The latest flare-up, the first in Shanghai in about three months, may raise questions about whether China’s Covid Zero approach will be sustainable in the long run.Pfizer protection wanes after second dose  People vaccinated with the Pfizer-BioNTech shot start losing immunity about three months after their second dose, according to a study conducted in Israel and published Thursday in the British Medical Journal. The findings confirm the waning of protection, which is why many countries now advise boosters.EU to update vaccine-validity limit for travel The European Union will recommend a nine-month time limit for the validity of Covid-19 vaccinations for travel into the bloc and also propose prioritising vaccinated travellers. Member states should continue welcoming all travellers inoculated with shots approved by the bloc, according to a document seen by Bloomberg. It also calls for countries to reopen as of January 10 to all those who have used vaccines approved by the World Health Organization.The proposed updates suggest that boosters will be needed beyond the nine-month period.Germany passes 100,000 deaths Germany passed the threshold of 100,000 Covid-19 deaths, with the latest wave of the pandemic still pushing new infections higher and hospitals in some hotspots under severe pressure.Since the pandemic took hold at the beginning of last year, 100,119 people have died from the virus, according to the latest data from the RKI public-health institute. RKI also reported a record 75,961 new Covid-19 cases. Germany’s death toll is still lower than in the UK, France or Italy, which each passed 100,000 some time ago. The US has recorded the most fatalities with more than 770,000, followed by Brazil with over 610,000, according to the Bloomberg Covid-19 Tracker.Earlier, Olaf Scholz, who will succeed Angela Merkel as chancellor, said his coalition government would consider vaccine mandates for people who work with vulnerable groups. DM– With assistance from Christoph Rauwald, Felix Tam, Morten Buttler, Lenka Ponikelska, Foster Wong and Tara Patel."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receiveOn the latest episode of Spotify's "Science Vs." podcast, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, talked with host Wendy Zukerman about his views on the Biden administration's recent travel ban, which he said should be rolled back.The US began to restrict travel from eight countries in southern Africa on Monday because of the new Omicron coronavirus variant, which was labeled as a "variant of concern" by the World Health Organisation after its detection by South African scientists on 11 November.However, the location of its initial detection does not necessarily indicate that the variant originated in South Africa. The country already had a robust surveillance system in place for tracking viral diseases and genetic mutations like HIV, Ebola, and tuberculosis, which put it in a strong position to monitor variants of Covid-19."When we first saw and heard about what was going on in South Africa, we really were blind. We had no idea what was going to happen. And one of the things we wanted to do, which was understandable, was to best as possible protect the American public," Fauci told Zukerman.While Omicron's origins remain unknown, cases have been found in several countries, including the UK, US, Netherlands, and Belgium."We did not know it was in other countries at the time of the ban. It looked like it was just in South Africa," Fauci said. "But right now, you're right, it is out there, so it's going to spread no matter what. So that's the reason why I would feel that, hopefully, we can pull back on that ban as quickly as possible."Still, Fauci maintained that if a ban had not been instituted, people would have been upset and "crucified" the administration for its inaction.Get the best of our site delivered to your inbox every day.Pfizer is expected to share new data with US regulators as it seeks clearance for all adults to receive a booster shot. Its German partner, BioNTech, raised its forecast for this year’s vaccine sales to almost $20-billion.Stepping up the rate of vaccinations and boosters can help avoid a holiday surge, White House medical adviser Anthony Fauci said on Bloomberg TV. New York City schools are seeing greater-than-expected demand for vaccines for children aged five to 11, Mayor Bill de Blasio said. In England, National Health Service staff who work face to face with patients must be fully vaccinated by April 1. Meanwhile, an Australian study showed that immunised people are 16 times less likely to end up in intensive-care wards or to die from Covid-19, adding to evidence that may bolster the case for countries to treat Covid as endemic.Key developments Miami schools drop mask mandate Parents of Miami-Dade County public school students can opt out of the district’s mask mandate, the Miami Herald reported, citing Superintendent Alberto Carvalho. The eased protocols are due to the plummeting number of cases, hospitalisations and deaths in South Florida since the Delta variant caused a spike in infections over the summer, the newspaper said.Fauci seeks to prevent winter surge Stepping up the rate of vaccinations and boosters can help avoid a holiday surge in new cases that have dropped to a plateau of about 70,000 a day, White House medical adviser Anthony Fauci said.While hospitalisations and deaths have fallen in the US, it’s far too early to pull back on mitigation measures such as mask-wearing, Fauci said in an interview on Bloomberg Television’s Balance of Power with David Westin.  “If we get the overwhelming proportion of unvaccinated people vaccinated, and we get those who are vaccinated and eligible to get a booster,” Fauci said, “we can go a long way to preventing a new surge as we go into the winter.”Mauritius shuts schools as cases rise The Indian Ocean island of Mauritius has shut schools and will revert to online classes from Thursday after an increase in Covid-19 cases in the community. In the week through November 9, new asymptomatic cases rose to 809 from 620 in the prior seven days, according to Health Ministry data.Admissions to public hospitals advanced to 61 from 53.“There are risks that transmission will increase,” Education Minister Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun said in a video disseminated by the Port Louis-based Government Information Service.Since October 18, the ministry registered 1,856 cases in pre-primary, primary, secondary, and tertiary institutions, she said. As at November 9, a total of 866,610 people had completed inoculation, representing about 68.4% of the population.US to buy 1.4 million Merck pill doses Merck said the US had committed to buy 1.4 million courses of its Covid-19 pill developed with Ridgeback Biotherapeutics for about $1-billion, bringing the country’s total to 3.1 million.The purchases are contingent on Food and Drug Administration clearance of the oral antiviral, called molnupiravir, Merck said on Tuesday in a statement, and the US has the ability to buy two million more courses. New York City sees high demand for kids’ vaccines New York City schools are seeing greater-than-expected demand for vaccines for children aged five to 11, Mayor Bill de Blasio said. After long lines were reported at about a dozen school vaccination sites on Monday, the city is sending 24 mobile units to schools, De Blasio said. About 4,500 students got shots on Monday at school sites, for a total of almost 25,000 in that age group that have been vaccinated so far, according to the mayor.De Blasio had previously planned to have vaccine sites at schools at least one day a week. For those that had more demand than expected Monday, a site will open there again in the next few days, De Blasio said. Scotland considers tighter restrictions Scotland is looking at tightening coronavirus restrictions because of a high level of new cases as it hosts the United Nations climate summit in its largest city. The government expects case numbers to increase further in the coming weeks, partly due to the COP26 meeting in Glasgow, Deputy First Minister John Swinney told lawmakers on Tuesday. The administration in Edinburgh “cannot rule out” strengthening existing measures to avoid the need for any future lockdowns, Swinney said. NHS staff must be fully vaccinated National Health Service staff in England who work face to face with patients must be fully vaccinated against Covid-19 by April 1, Health Secretary Sajid Javid told Parliament. Only those who can prove they are fully vaccinated can be employed by the NHS. The decision follows a government consultation that had 34,000 responses, Javid said. BioNTech lifts vaccine sales forecast BioNTech raised its forecast for this year’s vaccine sales to as much as €17-billion, lifting the estimate once more as the pandemic drags on and countries order more shots. BioNTech and partner Pfizer have signed contracts to deliver some 2.5 billion doses this year, and expect to manufacture as many as three billion by year-end. The windfall from the vaccine – the best-selling pharmaceutical product of all time in a given year – has given BioNTech the funds to push the rest of its experimental pipeline forward.   Genetics startup to announce new investment At the onset of the pandemic, a small genetics startup called Color Genomics set up a Covid-19 testing lab. The company, now known as Color Inc, plans to announce a new investment on Tuesday that values the startup at $4.6-billion, triple what it was just 11 months ago. Now Color must prove that a business built around a pandemic will serve a purpose when the virus is contained.Hong Kong requires boosters for some airport staff Airport Authority Hong Kong is requiring all airport staff belonging to high-risk groups to receive a third dose of vaccine, according to a statement on its website. The groups include those handling high-risk cargo or having unavoidable close range contact with arrival, transfer or transit passengers and crew. UK Secretary of State for Northern Ireland tests positive UK Secretary of State for Northern Ireland Brandon Lewis has tested positive for coronavirus, he said in a tweet. Lewis is “experiencing mild symptoms.”UK Minister for Science, Research and Innovation George Freeman said on November 8 that he has had “a bad attack of Covid”.Bulgaria, Ukraine report record deaths Bulgaria recorded a record 334 daily Covid deaths. It’s the European Union’s least-vaccinated country, with just 22% of people fully inoculated. The Balkan country has the world’s second-highest overall death rate after Peru. Widespread institutional distrust and doubts about the safety of the vaccines have slowed inoculation. Two weeks ago, the health ministry limited most public leisure activities to those who are either vaccinated or have had Covid, or who test negative. The spread of cases has slowed down since, but hospitals continue to fill up.Ukraine also reported a record 833 deaths in the past 24 hours.Vaccination slashes deaths and ICU stays, study finds People who are fully vaccinated are 16 times less likely to end up in intensive care wards or to die from Covid-19 than those who aren’t immunised, an Australian study found, the latest evidence showing how the shots prevent the most dreaded outcomes. Nearly 16 out of 100,000 people who had yet to receive a Covid vaccine landed in intensive care or died after contracting the virus, compared with fewer than one in every 100,000 who were fully vaccinated, according to data compiled by health authorities in New South Wales, Australia’s most populous state. The results add to a growing body of evidence that the vaccines’ protection against severe disease and death holds up even after the waning of protective antibodies over time allowed more breakthrough infections. They will likely bolster the case for countries to treat Covid as endemic, causing a mostly mild malaise among the vaccinated.Covid stole 28 million years of life last year The pandemic’s effects on mortality have been uneven. Life expectancy dipped in most places last year, shaving 28.1 million years off the cumulative longevity in 31 countries. But residents of a handful of places that successfully kept Covid-19 at bay – including New Zealand and Taiwan – actually lived longer.  German parties agree on new measures The three parties in talks to form the next German government agreed on a package of measures to tackle the latest surge in cases, which seeks to avoid sweeping restrictions like school closures and curfews.The legislation, which the SPD, Greens and FDP want to push through Parliament next week, is designed to provide a nationwide framework and will replace a law that expires on November 25. The measures – many of which are already being deployed – include distancing and hygiene rules, obligatory mask wearing and some restrictions for public events and travel.Lawmakers from the three parties decided to let the existing legislation lapse and draw up a new framework due to concerns that some of the measures previously agreed interfered too severely with citizen rights and potentially conflicted with Germany’s Constitution. DM– With assistance from Anuchit Nguyen, Jeff Sutherland, Iain Rogers, Elaine Chen and Kamlesh Bhuckory."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receiveSaturday, 04 December22 Nov
Europe is back "at the epicentre" of the pandemic, the World Health Organisation (WHO) warned early in November.Countries across the continent have been experiencing a surge in cases. According to WHO officials, Europe has seen a more than 50% increase in Covid cases. WHO Europe head Hans Kluge said in a statement that the continent could experience half a million more Covid deaths by February 2022.
Europe is back "at the epicentre" of the pandemic, the World Health Organisation (WHO) warned early in November.Countries across the continent have been experiencing a surge in cases. According to WHO officials, Europe has seen a more than 50% increase in Covid cases. WHO Europe head Hans Kluge said in a statement that the continent could experience half a million more Covid deaths by February 2022.14h agoThe Daily Dose
                    Your daily dose of health info and news.
                 Subscribe or Login Subscribe or LoginBecause of Covid-19, South Africa has seen a reversal of some of the gains it had made in the fight against HIV/Aids and tuberculosis (TB), but one expert believes some of the resources used to grapple with the current global pandemic can also be utilised for HIV programmes.South Africa has the biggest HIV epidemic in the world, with 7.5-million people living with the virus in 2019. HIV prevalence is high among the general population at 19%.United Nations Aids agency UNAids set countries a 90-90-90 target for 2020, by which time 90% of people should know their status, 90% should be on treatment and 90% of all people receiving antiretroviral therapy should have viral suppression. As of June this year, South Africa was sitting at 93-76-89 for the total population.The South African National Aids Council says the Covid-19 pandemic has led to disruptions in testing and treatment services for HIV. The National Income Dynamics Study Coronavirus Rapid Mobile Survey found that there was a reduction in how many people used primary healthcare facilities during the pandemic, especially in HIV testing, across almost all districts in the country.For facilities supported by global social healthcare group BroadReach, there was a drop of up to 55% among patients coming to facilities when the government first imposed a national lockdown in response to the Covid-19 crisis in March 2020. As of November this year, the number sat at 70% of pre-pandemic levels.But while Covid-19 affected the delivery as well as access to health services, it also brought new opportunities, says BroadReach public health expert Dr Ernest Darkoh.“Covid-19 is forcing us to do remarkable things and with the vaccine roll-out currently taking place, it gives us an opportunity to get to the majority of the population,” said Darkoh.“Covid-19 has also allowed healthcare workers to see patients online. The dispensing of HIV medication has been made easy and has proven to be a better model to manage treatment. We need to capitalise on the gains made in the Covid-19 management and if we don’t use the experience from Covid-19, we will not be ready for another pandemic.”According to Darkoh, as a country with the single largest population of people living with HIV, South Africa has over the years made strides in ensuring that they are able to access treatment.For the country to be able to prevent new infections, 30 percent of which are among adolescent girls and young women between the ages 15 to 24, there needs to be a focus in addressing intergenerational sex, sexual and reproductive health rights and services as well as addressing the economic and social determinants that make this population vulnerable to contracting HIV, Darkoh said.“So many of the interventions like the vaginal ring, condoms and pre-exposure prophylaxis rely on how comfortable people are with sex,” he said.“It makes it harder for people to use them when they are uncomfortable to have the conversation about sex because we have this conservative approach towards sex, which needs to be changed.”Subscribe for R30/mth for the first three months. Cancel anytime.Subscribers get access to all our best journalism, subscriber-only newsletters, events and a weekly cryptic crossword.M&G PremiumM&G Premium Already a subscriber? Sign in hereM&G PremiumM&G PremiumM&G PremiumFor all the latest information and advice from the Department of Health relating to Covid-19, please visit sacoronavirus.co.za 


Contact UsStory Tip-offsPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyEthics & Social Media PolicyAbout UsCorrections And ClarificationsAdvertisingTerms of Service and SecurityTerms of UseMail & Guardian JobsFind property for saleWe value your feedbackSubscriber login FAQSubscriptionsAll material © Mail & Guardian Online. Material may not be published or reproduced in any form without prior written permission.BusinessTechAspen Pharmacare plans to enter into a licensing agreement with Johnson & Johnson allowing the South African drug company to make its own-branded Covid-19 vaccine.The agreement, confirmed by Aspen in a statement Tuesday, would extend an existing deal for it to package and fill vials of the US company’s shots at a plant in South Africa.The South African-based pharmaceutical plans to launch this vaccine under the brand name ‘Aspenovax’, it said in a trading statement on Tuesday (30 November).The group said it will manufacture the vaccine using drug substances supplied by Johnson & Johnson, and then sell the vaccine under the Aspenovax branding to a number of African countries.The agreement will run until the end of 2026 and includes the right to manufacture additional versions based on booster shots or new Covid-19 variants.Aspen, Africa’s largest drugmaker, has the capacity to manufacture as many as 300 million doses of the J&J shot and plans to increase that over time to more than 700 million by January 2023.The agreement comes as South Africa grapples with the recent discovery of the new Omicron Covid-19 variant. Details on the variant are scarce, and scientists say they currently don’t have enough information on how transmissible the variant is or whether existing vaccines could be less effective.The variant is driving a fourth wave of Covid-19 infections in Gauteng, with the province reporting high levels of Covid-19 cases and hospital admissions.According to Dr Waasila Jassat of the National Institute for Communicable Diseases, hospital admissions have mostly been recorded in Tshwane, in both the private and public sectors.However, the other districts are also starting to show signs of the peak in those who land in hospital because of Covid-19 since the past week, with the unvaccinated more likely to seek hospital treatment or die.“There’s a sharp week on week increase. And it’s important to note because as we know that when the hospitals become overwhelmed, there’s less capacity and more mortality.”According to Jassat, who was speaking during a media briefing with Health Minister, Dr Joe Phaahla, the highest risk of admissions is still in the over 65 age group and has been peaking in all age groups over the last six weeks.However, the percentage in the middle age group was low, while data shows that it was ‘very’ high in young children. “Of course, higher proportions of older people are being admitted, because they’re at risk for more severe disease,” she said.New vaccines could be necessary The plethora of mutations in the omicron variant are likely to help it evade protection provided by existing vaccines, making it necessary to develop new immunizations, Moderna chief executive Stephane Bancel told the Financial Times.It may take months for pharmaceutical companies to develop and deploy updated immunizations that they can deliver in large numbers, Bancel said in an interview with the newspaper.There is no way the current shots will provide the same level of protection against omicron as they do against delta, he said.The current vaccines from companies including Moderna, Pfizer, BioNTech AstraZeneca, and Johnson & Johnson are all able to help reduce the risk of severe infection and death from the previous strains of the virus, though they work less well against the more transmissible delta variant.Research is still underway to determine if omicron causes the same level of illness as older versions of the virus, if it can evade protection from vaccines and previous infections, and if it will be able to outcompete the existing strains as the pathogen continues to circulate throughout the world.Pfizer chief executive Albert Bourla said his company will be ready with a vaccine targeting omicron in 100 days, should it be necessary.With further reporting by Bloomberg.Read: South Africa’s vaccine mandates face legal challengeComments section policy:BusinessTechMedical schemes in South Africa face uncertainty from many angles, with ongoing concerns around the Covid-19 pandemic making it an especially taxing period.Speaking at a recent Institute of Health Risk Managers (IHRM) event, Christoff Raath, joint chief executive of Insight Actuaries and Consultants, said it is both the worst time and the best time to be an actuary because of the many uncertainties pulling in many different directions. These uncertainties are brought about predominantly by Covid-19, he said.Raath said that some of the major uncertainties facing medical aids include:“Medical schemes are now sitting at record solvency levels. Trustees are legitimately asking how these record highs can be used to help medical scheme members,” Raath said.While schemes have healthy reserves and are indeed exploring ways to transfer this to the members, it is difficult to judge the rate at which these reserves must be used given the uncertainty of a Covid -19 future.He added that certain schemes have used their reserves to keep annual contribution increases below inflation. While this will work in the short-term, the long-term risk is that this could result in low solvency issues in the future.“Some people, for different reasons, have not accessed healthcare services – some are reluctant to go to health practitioners and medical facilities for fear of contracting Covid-19. The long-term effects of deferring health services is yet to be understood. It is envisaged that this could culminate in more severe health issues down the line.“The utilisation of health services could soon change, as more people get vaccinated, translating into what will be the new normal. This could result in a correlating increase in people seeking normal day-to-day healthcare and going for elective surgery. It could also mean that people may feel differently about belonging to a medical scheme.”Raath said that the industry could also experience higher resignations (i.e. no membership growth), especially given the current challenging economic climate – another possible long-term impact of Covid-19.Read: Medical aids are going through drastic changes in South Africa – and the NHI is speeding things upComments section policy:BusinessTechAsset manager firm Schroders has published its modelling on how the Omicron variant will likely impact South Africa’s economy in the coming months, with the group preparing for a significant increase in Covid-19 cases but fewer hospitalisations and deaths.In a research note published this week, the firm said that uncertainty about the virulence of Omicron, and its ability to resist vaccination and spread rapidly, among other things, has rocked global financial markets.“Those questions will take time to answer, meaning that sentiment is likely to remain dampened in the near term, particularly towards emerging markets that are most sensitive to risk appetite and tend to lag behind in the deployment of Covid-19 treatments,” said David Rees, senior emerging markets economist at Schroders.“This is particularly the case for South Africa and other parts of the African continent. From an economic point of view, the emergence of Omicron adds to the recent tilt in many parts of the world towards the reintroduction of restrictions to contain fresh waves of Covid-19 infections.”Until concerns about Omicron are cleared up, he said domestic lockdown measures and travel bans add downside risks to global growth and could exacerbate inflationary pressures if there are further disruptions to supply chains.Modelling Schroders expects the leading vaccine makers – such as Pfizer and Moderna – to have data about what protection is conferred by their existing jabs within the next fortnight. Better data on transmissibility should come in the next two to four weeks and on the severity in the next one to two months.The key metric to watch in the meantime will be data on hospitalisations and deaths in South Africa, especially the Gauteng province where most Omicron cases have so far occurred, it said.The table below offers a round-up of what Schroders believe to be possible scenarios of how the variant develops.Countries are already taking steps to try to limit the spread of the variant. Japan, Israel and Morocco are among those to have closed their borders to all tourists, while many countries have instituted travel bans or quarantine rules on southern Africa.However, such measures are probably already too late to have a significant impact, Schroders said.“Omicron has been identified already in several countries and is probably already present everywhere that doesn’t have strict entry requirements. It will probably be spreading most rapidly in countries where Covid restrictions had already been largely lifted, such as the US, UK, South America and much of South Asia.”Investing While it is still very early in dealing with this new variant, the world is not back at square one as it was in March 2020, said Johanna Kyrklund, chief investment officer at Schroders.“In the intervening time, we have learnt a huge amount about the virus, the science is moving at speed, and much of the developed world at least has high levels of vaccination coverage. I, therefore, don’t think it’s time for investors to be shying away from risk entirely. But the uncertainties are too great for this to be called a buying opportunity.”She noted that in December 2020, the world had announcements of the first Covid-19 vaccines.“That was the moment when being punchy proved the right strategy: big bets on cyclical assets – especially those tied into the re-opening trade – proved the right call,” Kyrklund said.“However, markets have moved on since then. The economic cycle has matured, and valuations are higher now. With the new variant posing additional risk to growth, I don’t think it’s time for similarly broad macro calls. It’s time to be more nuanced.”Investors also need to bear in mind that the emergence of the new variant may see central banks delay tightening monetary policy, she said.“We already thought central banks were behind the curve in terms of reacting to higher inflation. If they further delay tightening, this could continue to support valuations.”“Given both the heightened uncertainty and the late stage of the economic cycle, diversification will likely prove crucial. The role of fixed income as a diversifier in portfolios remains important, in my view.”Kyrklund said investors might want to consider adjusting their exposure to equities rather than moving out of shares entirely.  She added that Europe is perhaps a region where equity performance may be more challenged in the near term.Several countries were already instituting new Covid restrictions given rising infections before news of the variant. In terms of investment styles, growth may continue to be favoured over value, which could see the US as a relative winner.“Ultimately, it is too soon to say how Omicron will affect markets longer term. We simply don’t have enough information about it yet. At the margins, taking care over cyclical exposure could be prudent in the near term, but it’s too soon for a wholesale change.”Read: 3 lockdown scenarios for South Africa – including fourth wave restrictions over ChristmasComments section policy:Saturday, 04 December15 Nov
A new study has found that in South Africa a higher proportion of Black Africans compared to other racial groups had been admitted to public health facilities for Covid-19. The study published in the South African Medical Journal looked at the differential impacts of Covid-19 on hospitalised patients in South Africa for equitable care.The researchers used Covid-19 hospitalisation and mortality data from daily hospital surveillance data gathered from National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) update reports from 6 March 2020 to 24 January 2021. The NICD data included 215 028 Covid-19 hospitalisations reported by healthcare facilities, 393 public and 251 private. 
A new study has found that in South Africa a higher proportion of Black Africans compared to other racial groups had been admitted to public health facilities for Covid-19. The study published in the South African Medical Journal looked at the differential impacts of Covid-19 on hospitalised patients in South Africa for equitable care.The researchers used Covid-19 hospitalisation and mortality data from daily hospital surveillance data gathered from National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) update reports from 6 March 2020 to 24 January 2021. The NICD data included 215 028 Covid-19 hospitalisations reported by healthcare facilities, 393 public and 251 private. 14h agoThe Daily Dose
                    Your daily dose of health info and news.
                To continue, please click the box below to let us know you're not a robot.Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading. For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy.For inquiries related to this message please contact our support team and provide the reference ID below.
								We use
								cookies
								for a number of reasons, such as keeping FT Sites reliable and secure,
								personalising content and ads, providing social media features and to
								analyse how our Sites are used.
							
A new world is possible.
Let's not go back to what wasn't working anyway.
Joseph CotterillWe’ll send you a myFT Daily Digest email rounding up the latest Health Care news every morning.A report into “irregularities” in the funding of Covid-19 communications in South Africa — published by president Cyril Ramaphosa in September — has resulted in widespread public outcry, and not just about the R150m ($10m) that had been spent.The scandal — known as “Digital Vibes”, after the South African company that received the money — has come to symbolise how corruption and weak governance have undermined the country’s ability to deliver crucial health information to citizens.Africa’s most industrialised nation is also the one that has been hardest hit by the coronavirus pandemic, and desperately needs to promote mass vaccination. Yet, even without self-inflicted reputational damage, government communications about Covid face a struggle to cross South Africa’s linguistic and economic divides.In the report, South Africa’s anti-corruption Special Investigating Unit concluded that Zweli Mkhize, the then health minister, had exerted undue pressure in 2019 to ensure that cronies gained control of health communications through Digital Vibes.Chris Vick, a public relations specialist with CovidComms SA, a volunteer group working to improve pandemic public communications, says that not only did Digital Vibes use up resources that could have been spent on better Covid-19 messaging, it actually worsened one of the biggest obstacles to convincing South Africans to take Covid risks seriously.After a litany of graft scandals in the ruling African National Congress party over the past decade, and many more years of failure to provide basic services to the poorest, “the biggest problem is that there’s a trust deficit that exists in terms of people’s attitudes to the state,” Vick says. “Digital Vibes made a huge contribution to that trust deficit.”Mkhize resigned and has been succeeded by Joe Phaahla, his former deputy. This month, Phaahla apologised “to all South Africans for this very unfortunate and devastating saga”.While about one in three adult South Africans are fully vaccinated, take-up rates are flagging, reducing the country’s chances of hitting the World Health Organization’s global target of vaccinating 70 per cent of the population by mid-2022. Clear health messaging is vital, but the task is significantly complicated by linguistic diversity.Under its constitution, South Africa recognises 11 official languages and, while English is the lingua franca of business, politics and South Africa’s internet, it is far from the most widely spoken. Many people rely on media other than the internet or even television, yet the state’s communications have been typified by English-language televised addresses by Ramaphosa or online briefings.South Africa’s digital divide is real. Radio is the biggest medium in South AfricaCovidComms SA has focused on translating and simplifying core messages into as many languages as possible — including Khoikhoi, which rarely has official recognition. “It is still science, but it is science in plain language and it is science in your mother tongue,” Vick says.Radio has also been vital for reaching communities beyond the largely English-language “information dump” of the government messaging, says Pontsho Pilane, who presents a health slot on Motsweding FM, a station that broadcasts in the Setswana language spoken largely in South Africa’s north-western provinces.“South Africa’s digital divide is real,” she says. “Radio is the biggest medium in South Africa.” About 1.7m Motsweding listeners tune into the morning show where Pilane is a regular. While it can be a challenge — the Setswana words for “hand sanitiser” or “quarantine” are not part of everyday language — she says listeners send in a lot of questions that reveal concerns about vaccines or Covid that communicators might not otherwise hear.“Most people are just scared because there’s not a lot of information out there” about issues such as side-effects, Pilane says.South Africa has had experience of communicating about public health emergencies before, particularly its high rates of HIV infection.In rural or remote areas without easy access to media, these often took the form of large in-person gatherings, which could quickly spread knowledge and break down myths. But coronavirus is so infectious that this approach has not been possible during the current pandemic. “None of these communication methods works because of the way the virus spreads,” Vick says.Instead, health workers who go out into local communities have been the most effective front-line messengers, though this is time-consuming. They can also advise patients on how to deal with conflicting communications on Covid and on other widespread diseases such as HIV and tuberculosis.“A lot of people went off their ARVs [antiretrovirals] or chronic medication because they were afraid of going to the clinic,” Pilane says. In the earlier phases of South Africa’s lockdowns, some patients seeking help for non-Covid ailments were wrongly turned away by clinics. “There was a lot of miscommunication around that,” she adds.At the same time, Pilane is not looking forward to explaining the Digital Vibes saga to listeners. The time that could be spent demystifying scientific studies or vaccine information, will instead be a reminder of why government messaging is little trusted in the first place. “Digital Vibes is a slap in the face of South Africans,” she says. “This does not make it easier.”Get alerts on Health Care when a new story is publishedInternational EditionTo continue, please click the box below to let us know you're not a robot.Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading. For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy.For inquiries related to this message please contact our support team and provide the reference ID below.MOSCOW, December 4. /TASS/. Russian President Vladimir Putin has discussed pooling efforts in tackling the coronavirus pandemic over the phone with his South African counterpart Cyril Ramaphosa, the Kremlin press service reported on Saturday."The heads of states agreed to pool efforts in tackling the coronavirus infection pandemic, particularly amid the emergence of the new Omicron strain," the report said.The leaders of Russia and South Africa also discussed the details of preparations to the Russian-Africa summit, the cooperation within the BRICS framework and the issues of trade and economic cooperation.The World Health Organization (WHO) designated the B.1.1.529 variant of the coronavirus identified in South Africa as a "Variant of Concern" and assigned it the Greek letter Omicron last week. In its statement, the WHO noted that this variant has a large number of mutations, some of which are concerning. Moreover, according to preliminary data, the risk of contracting this variant is substantially higher than with the Delta variant.Russian Health Minister Mikhail Murashko said on December 3 that no cases of the Omicron COVID-19 variant had been registered in Russia so far.Russian nationals do not need a visa for visiting South Africa. There are no direct flights between Russian and South African cities. BusinessTechThe Department of Basic Education says that schools plan to reopen on schedule in January 2022, despite a rapidly increasing number of Covid-19 cases in South Africa.After two years of Covid-19 lockdowns which significantly impacted teaching time, both the 2022 and the 2023 school calendars will see a return to some normality with the reintroduction of ‘staggered’ open dates for both inland and coastal provinces.This staggered date has historically accommodated people who were travelling from holidays – another part of South African life that has been significantly disrupted by the Covid-19 pandemic.Briefing parliament on Tuesday, Basic Education minister Angie Motshekga said that inland schools are expected to open on 12 January 2022 and coastal schools on 19 January 2022. Motshekga emphasised that these dates would be dependent on the Covid-19 pandemic.The reopening of schools was postponed by several weeks in January 2020 due to the impact of the third wave of Covid-19 infections. Scientists and government advisors have warned that South Africa will see a fourth wave of Covid-19 infections over December 2021 and January 2022 driven by the new Omicron Covid-19 variant.Inland cluster 2022 school calendarCoastal cluster school calendar 2022 South Africa’s schools have been impacted by several lockdowns over the past 18 months. The Department of Basic Education estimates that learners in disadvantaged communities lost a year’s worth of learning in 2020 due to a lack of teaching contact time and a rotational learning system.Under the current rotational system, high schools operate under one of three systems. Students are expected to attend school physically every second day, every second week or once a day in a morning or afternoon slot.During downtime, students are expected to complete assigned work to ensure they don’t fall behind the curriculum. Several schools have also incorporated online and digital learning platforms for students.Read: New laws planned for schools and elections in South AfricaComments section policy:To continue, please click the box below to let us know you're not a robot.Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading. For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy.For inquiries related to this message please contact our support team and provide the reference ID below.The US outbreak, on the rise again, is shifting to the Midwest, according to the latest data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Germany will restrict access to restaurants, bars and public events for unvaccinated people in regions that exceed a threshold of hospital admissions, while stopping short of a nationwide lockdown. The Portuguese island of Madeira will impose new restrictions on unvaccinated residents and visitors. The American Medical Association and more than 60 other US health organisations endorsed the Biden administration’s vaccine mandate for companies with 100 or more employees. A more infectious new version of the Delta variant is spreading fast in the UK, but it seems less likely to cause symptomatic illness.Key developments Apple slightly pushes back return to officeApple has chosen February 1 as the deadline for corporate employees to start their return to offices, a slight delay from its previous goal of January, marking a key step toward getting its operations back to normal after the pandemic. Starting at the beginning of February, the company will adopt a phased return, Chief Executive Officer Tim Cook told staff via email on Thursday. For the first month, some teams will be required to come into the office one or two days a week. After that “transitional period,” staff will be required to come in at least three days per week, including Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays.Almost everyone vaccinated in Australia’s capital Almost all eligible citizens in Australia’s “Bush Capital” have had at least one dose of Covid-19 vaccine and it is expected to reach full inoculation next month, a milestone that shows just how fast the nation has overcome a slow start to its vaccination roll-out.Canberra, one of a number of highly vaccinated cities in the Asia-Pacific region, achieved the feat by relying on education and access to get its citizens to embrace the roll-out, according to Andrew Barr, the chief minister of the Australian Capital Territory which oversees the city. Data show the city’s vaccination rate is at 96.8% for eligible people aged 12 and over.Madeira island imposes curbs on unvaccinated The Portuguese island of Madeira will impose new restrictions on unvaccinated residents and visitors amid a surge in cases across Europe. People who have not been vaccinated will be banned from attending public events such as concerts from Saturday, Miguel Albuquerque, the president of Madeira’s regional government, said on Thursday. Unvaccinated people are allowed to attend mass or go to the supermarket as long as they show a negative Covid-19 test.Cases jump in the US Midwest The US outbreak, on the rise again, is shifting to the Midwest, according to the latest data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Indiana recorded the largest increase of infections in the week ending November 16, with Michigan, Minnesota, Illinois and Wisconsin among the states with the biggest weekly jumps, the data show. Parts of the Northeast, the most vaccinated region of the country, are also recording a spike, with infections in New York state up 27%. The seven-day average of new hospital admissions with confirmed Covid-19 cases is rising in 28 states and the nation’s capital from a week earlier, with visible clusters in the Northeast and upper Midwest.Germany cracks down on unvaccinated Germany will restrict access to restaurants, bars and public events for unvaccinated people in regions that exceed a threshold of Covid-19 hospital admissions, while stopping short of a nationwide lockdown, Chancellor Angela Merkel said.Merkel and German regional leaders agreed on a catalogue of measures, with restrictions increasing by region as hospitals fill up with patients, in response to what she called the fourth wave of the pandemic to strike Germany.Only people who are vaccinated or have recovered from Covid-19 infections will have access to leisure, cultural and sports events, gastronomy, hospitality and services such as gyms, according to the agreement presented on Thursday. The measures kick in above a certain level of hospitalisations as a share of a region’s population. US health groups endorse work mandate The American Medical Association and more than 60 other US health organisations endorsed the Biden administration’s vaccine mandate for companies with 100 or more employees. They said the requirement is “reasonable and essential to protect workers”.“When employers require workers to get vaccinated, vaccination rates increase to over 90%,” a public letter read. “Courts have repeatedly supported the legality of employer mandates.”More than 30 lawsuits have been filed against the requirement, which also allows for regular testing. The deadline is January 4. Astra cocktail data show long protection AstraZeneca’s antibody cocktail was more than 80% successful at both preventing symptomatic disease for six months and stopping the illness from worsening, demonstrating its ability to provide strong and long-lasting protection.The medicine reduced the risk of developing symptomatic Covid by 83% in one of the trials after a six-month follow-up, the company said Thursday. The other, which was from outpatient participants with mild to moderate illness, found the cocktail reduced the risk of severe disease or death by 88% if given within three days.Hungary expands mask mandate Hungary will expand a mask mandate to indoor spaces from Saturday, Cabinet Minister Gergely Gulyas said, as the country fights one of the fastest-rising rates of Covid-19 infections and deaths globally.Vaccination certificates will also be required to attend events with more than 500 participants. Currently masks are only required on public transportation.Poland has half a million in quarantine Polish sanitary services quarantined 503,400 people, the most since October last year, as Covid-19 rips through the European Union’s fifth most populous state in a growing headache for the ruling nationalists.The surge in cases comes as little over half of the population of 38 million is fully vaccinated and the government is reluctant to tighten its light-touch restrictions. Daily infections exceeded 24,000 in the last two days, while the death toll since the start of the pandemic has risen to almost 80,000. The country already allows the vaccinated to carry on with their lives as normal even when household members tested positive for Covid.Czechs impose curbs for unvaccinated The Czech government approved restrictions for people who aren’t vaccinated against Covid-19, limiting their access to events and services.As of Monday, only citizens who are fully vaccinated or have had Covid-19 in the past six months will be allowed into cultural and sporting events, enter restaurants and use services. Outgoing Prime Minister Andrej Babis said on Thursday he expects the new measures to be in place for three months.Merkel to usher in tighter rules Chancellor Angela Merkel held talks with Germany’s regional leaders on Thursday to agree on tougher restrictions to tackle record gains in Covid-19 infections.The outgoing German leader made another urgent call for action on Wednesday as a fourth virus wave engulfs the country with “full force,” and said the latest video call with the 16 state premiers is overdue. The country logged more than 65,000 infections in a single day for the first time on Thursday, with hospitals facing stretched intensive-care units sounding the alarm.Austrian regions intensify curbs Just days after restricting the movements of unvaccinated people, Austria is moving closer to a general lockdown.The provinces of Salzburg and Upper Austria, where infection rates have soared to some 1,600 per 100,000 people, will impose regional lockdowns from Monday. The federal government could announce new nationwide measures on Friday after a meeting with provincial leaders.Greece orders more doctors Greece ordered private-sector doctors to work for the national health system, government spokesman Ioannis Oikonomou told reporters in Athens on Thursday. With hospitalisations on the rise, Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis was expected to address the nation later in the day.Delta sub-variant spreads in UK A more infectious new version of Covid-19’s Delta variant is spreading fast in the UK, accounting for about 12% of the samples gathered in the most recent government survey. That represents a 2.8% daily growth rate for sub-variant AY.4.2 over the course of the React survey, from October 19 to November 5, the researchers said. Still, the new sub-variant seemed less likely to cause symptomatic Covid. Masks cut Covid risk in half As Covid-19 makes a comeback in Europe, one study offers a reminder that simple measures like mask-wearing and hand-washing help to ward off the disease. Donning a face mask more than halves the risk of getting Covid, according to a review of eight studies published in the British Medical Journal. So does hand-washing. Physical distancing, meantime, cuts the risk by a quarter. Excess deaths rise in South Africa Excess deaths in South Africa, seen as a more accurate assessment of Covid-19 deaths than mortality officially attributed to the disease, have begun to climb.In the week ended November 7, there were 1,531 excess fatalities, the number of deaths over an historical average, of which 157 were officially attributed to the coronavirus, the South African Medical Research Council said in a Wednesday report.Pandemic tested regulators’ limitsThe pace of approvals for Covid-19 diagnostic tests has been limited by the scale of the applicants compared to a limited number of staff qualified to review them, according to Roche Pharmaceuticals Chief Executive Officer Bill Anderson.“I think the pandemic has tested the limits of the regulatory bodies who approve things because of just the number of things that have been coming at them,” Anderson said at the Bloomberg New Economy Forum in Singapore when asked why it was so difficult to get rapid Covid-19 diagnostic tests in the US as compared to Europe.Gates sees deaths falling below flu levels Covid deaths and infection rates may dip below seasonal flu levels by the middle of next year assuming new dangerous variants don’t emerge in the meantime, Bill Gates said.Between natural and vaccine immunity and emerging oral treatments, “the death rate and the disease rate ought to be coming down pretty dramatically,” the billionaire founder of Microsoft said on Thursday at the Bloomberg New Economy Forum in Singapore. DM– With assistance from Iain Rogers, Zoltan Simon and Jonathan Levin."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receiveBusinessTechSouth Africa is seeing a massive resignation wave that will impact the country’s post-Covid economic rebound, says Emma Durkin, head of Human Capital at Altron Karabina.While much of the focus of South Africa’s post-pandemic strategy has been on infrastructure and capital development, a more critical factor is valuable human capital and much-needed skills at South African businesses, she said.Speaking to Michael Avery in the latest episode of BusinessTalk, Durkin said that while an increase in resignations was first reported in July 2021, what was a trickle in cases has developed into a full-blown wave as more skilled people weigh up their options.“If we don’t look after people now, the scarce skills bump that we are going through now is going to become a crisis, and that is something we want to avoid,” she said.While South Africa is not unique in experiencing a brain drain, Durkin said that the Covid-19 pandemic and closure of borders had created 18 months of pent-up demand, with a significant amount of people emigrating in just a few months.“As industries are opening again and people are becoming a little more confidence, they are recruiting aggressively, particularly in the tech area.”While there is a lot of negativity in South Africa, Durkin said that the key reasons are the same as they have been for more than a decade, including:However, Durkin noted that more recent developments have also accelerated the emigration wave. “A big wobble within our employee grouping was the unrest in Durban earlier this year, which touched on Gauteng. That really has instigated quite a big wave in our environment.”Finances While the reasons for emigrating from South Africa are well-documented, Durkin said that many skilled South Africans are also quitting their jobs due to finances.Coming off the back of 18 months of a pandemic, salary cuts, reduced incomes, and increased inflation have all played a part, she said.“Essentially, people are leaving to get more money  – it really is as simple as that. We have a lot of families where a breadwinner or spouse have lost their jobs on the back of Covid-19. So there is an awful lot of people who are under an awful lot of financial pressure at the moment.”“Resigning for another job, even if it’s at another local company, you are essentially guaranteeing a 10% – 20% increase in your earning power, which is very alluring,” she said.Durkin said that many companies are now looking at market-related salary bindings to ensure that skilled workers are not lost. However, she noted that the tech sector is seeing something of a ‘feeding frenzy’ at the moment as competing companies offer increasing wages to attract the best workers.This makes finding ideal salaries quite hard at the moment as there are always people who will pay more for a particular skill, she said.﻿A number of skilled South Africans are opting to resign from their corporate jobs to freelance as part of a growing ‘great resignation’, according to contracting company Outsized.While this trend has been reported internationally, South Africa is unique as the pool of available independent skills in South Africa is often criticised as shallow in some fields, it said.A survey conducted by the group found that 81.5% of skilled professionals are considering resigning to go solo. Although South Africa’s unemployment rate is disconcertingly high, many skills are in short supply and people with experience in those fields will not struggle to find positions, it said.Johann van Niekerk, managing director of Outsized for Africa, said that skilled professionals are opting to become independent for multiple reasons, including:“For many, what was previously just a thought germinating in their minds has sprouted because of Covid and the constraints and the opportunities it has created. Moreover, if the skills you need are not available locally, another beauty of using contractors is that you can draw from anywhere in the world,” Van Niekerk said.He said that handling this change requires a different way of thinking because HR departments are set up to deal with long-term hires rather than to dip into a global talent pool on an ad-hoc basis.“Companies have been able to ignore this trend until now because it was a trickle, not a flood. But the coming weeks and months are likely to see a huge growth in resignations across all sectors as talented individuals opt for freedom, having prepared for the leap and with the security of knowing that their skills are in high demand.“Even if only a small percentage of your workers resign, for a big business that could mean tens or even hundreds of key workers leaving.”House sales show emigration trend FNB’s latest property barometer shows that many South Africans are selling their homes with plans to emigrate.Emigration-related sales in South Africa increased steadily between 2015 and 2019, rising from 5% of total sales in 2015 to a record-high of 13.4% in Q2 2019, the financial services firm said.This number subsequently dropped to around the 8% mark in 2021 due to a confluence of factors, including international restrictions and a strong property market. However, this is up a percentage point compared to the Q2 2020 report (7%).While the emigration-related selling trend has remained stable at 8% across the country for all home sales, the data shows that wealthier South Africans are more likely to sell up to emigrate.As many as 14% of home sellers in the R3.6 million house price bracket are selling to emigrate, with this figure dropping by a percentage point to 13% in the R2.6 million – R3.6 million house band.Read: Here’s how many university students plan to leave South Africa for workComments section policy:BusinessTechThe Department of Health will now offer R100 grocery vouchers to South Africans in their fifties who receive their first Covid-19 shot.The programme, dubbed ‘Vooma vouchers’, was previously only available to people aged 60 and above but has been expanded due to a slower than expected uptake.The vouchers are aimed at making it easier for older people to get vaccinated by offsetting some of the costs they incur getting to the vaccination sites, the department said.For the month of November every person who is 50 years and older and goes for their very first Covid-19 jab, will automatically receive notification of a R100 voucher as an SMS on the cell number they gave for vaccination.Those people who do not yet have a free Money Market account with Shoprite will need to register either in-store or by free USSD, WhatsApp or mobile App.  This service will ensure that the voucher can be traced and re-issued if it is lost and if it has not already been redeemed. It also means that people do not have to spend the full voucher all at once.The voucher is valid for 30 days after receiving it, the department said.Poor uptake The Department of Health said that its immediate priority is to vaccinate as many people aged fifty years and older ahead of the anticipated fourth wave, because over 80% of Covid-19 related deaths have occurred in this age group.Three in five people aged 50 years and older have had at least one dose of vaccination and reaching most of the remainder will substantially reduce the number of hospitalisations and deaths over the festive period and into the new year, it said.“Unfortunately, the uptake of Vooma vouchers among has been poor, with only 8,135 redeemed to date. We have also not seen a significant uptick in vaccinations among over sixties,” said Dr David Harrison, national lead for demand acceleration.“We are trying to understand the reasons for this slow uptake. We are only two weeks in and it may be that the message takes time to filter down to everyone. But we don’t have the luxury of time with the fourth wave approaching and must adapt our strategy quickly if it doesn’t seem to be having the desired effect,” he said.“The voucher is intended to assist people to access the vaccine, which has far greater value than the amount of the value itself. For older people in particular, vaccination may determine whether families spend their festive season visiting relatives in hospital or even attending funerals.”Data shows that there are still over four million people aged fifty and older who have not been vaccinated, and it is hoped that extending this offer will enable a substantial proportion of them to come forward, he said.Read: New modelling shows what to expect from fourth Covid-19 wave in South AfricaComments section policy:This website is using a security service to protect itself from online attacks.
Cloudflare Ray ID: 6b868cbaab141b5a
•
Your IP: 105.163.0.98
•
Performance & security by Cloudflare
Pfizer sought emergency approval of its Covid-19 pill for high-risk patients in the US as the Biden administration laid plans to buy 10 million courses of the treatment. The company separately agreed to let generic-drug makers produce inexpensive versions of the therapy for lower-income nations.New York City opened the New Year’s Eve celebration in Times Square to vaccinated revellers, having limited access to frontline workers last year. Washington, DC, said it would lift its blanket indoor-mask mandate.As authorities across Europe tried to control a new surge, Ireland and Germany headed toward new restrictions on movement, Spain’s Basque Country reimposed some curbs on large gatherings, and Ireland expanded booster eligibility.Key developments Pfizer seeks pill approval for high-risk patientsPfizer asked US regulators for emergency-use authorisation for high-risk patients of its Covid-19 pill. The drug, Paxlovid, blocks a crucial enzyme that’s key to coronavirus replication and would be the first of its kind if cleared, Pfizer said. It could be prescribed for home use, unlike most other treatments.The company said it would invest as much as $1-billion to support manufacturing and distribution. It has launched rolling submissions in other countries, including the UK, Australia, New Zealand and South Korea.Ireland imposes new restrictions Bars and restaurants must close by midnight, cinemas and theatres must require proof of vaccination and people should work from home where possible, under measures announced by Irish Prime Minister Micheal Martin to contend with surging infections and rising hospitalisations.“If the number of Covid infections and hospitalisations continues to grow at the rate we are currently seeing, no health system anywhere in the world would be able to cope,” Martin said in a national address.Household contacts of anyone infected will have to restrict their movement for five days and complete an antigen test, under the new initiative. The government also extended a booster programme to all people aged 50 and over and to anyone with an underlying health condition.US to buy 10 million Pfizer treatments The Biden administration plans to buy 10 million treatments of Pfizer’s Covid-19 pill. The company plans to submit data for the pill, administered twice a day for five days, to US regulators by Thanksgiving.Texas, Louisiana sue over health worker rule Louisiana and Texas filed separate suits seeking to block a federal vaccine mandate for employees at hospitals, hospices, skilled nursing facilities and home health agencies.The mandate is a “one-size-fits-all sledgehammer” that will force workers to choose between their jobs and “the jabs,” according to the Louisiana complaint, which was joined by Montana, Arizona, Alabama, Georgia, Idaho, Indiana, Mississippi, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Utah and West Virginia.The requirement, issued by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, will worsen staffing concerns, especially in nursing homes and rural communities, Texas said. Washington, DC, to scrap mask mandate Washington, DC, will lift its indoor mask mandate on November 22, nearly four months after the order was imposed because of a spike in cases.“Instead of following a blanket mandate, residents, visitors and workers will be advised to follow risk-based guidance from DC Health that accounts for current health metrics and a person’s vaccination status,” Mayor Muriel Bowser said.Masks still will be required in some locations, such as schools, public transportation, nursing homes and district government facilities where there is direct interaction between employees and the public.Mexico expands teenager vaccinations Mexico will make vaccinations available to children aged 15 to 17 without underlying health conditions. Pre-registration will begin on Friday.“Between 10 and 14 years mortality is very low, after 15 years there is an increase in mortality, although it is still low,” virus czar Hugo Lopez Gatell said. The country has sought to reverse judicial rulings that open vaccination to children between 12 and 17.New Zealand issues vaccine passes Vaccine passes were made available for the more than 3.4 million New Zealanders who are fully vaccinated, Covid-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins said.The pass can be downloaded to a phone or printed out. It can be used to attend hospitality settings, retail establishments, community and sporting events, religious gatherings and other functions. Vaccination status isn’t required at supermarkets, pharmacies, health services and other essential establishments.New York City opens Times Square for New Year’s Eve New York City will open Times Square on New Year’s Eve to fully vaccinated revellers, after limiting the celebration last year to frontline workers. This year, those too young to get a shot must be accompanied by a vaccinated adult, said Tom Harris, president of the Times Square Alliance. Visitors who aren’t able to get vaccinated because of a disability will need to provide proof of a negative Covid-19 test and wear a mask if able.“New York City is back,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said. “We want to show the world we’re back.” Ireland allows boosters for people over 50 Ireland will offer boosters to people over 50, the Health Ministry said. Individuals age 16 and older with underlying conditions, as well as residents of long-term health facilities also will be eligible. Recipients must have had their vaccine shot at least five months ago.Spain’s Basque region to limit large crowds Basque Country reimposed some restrictions on large gatherings as infection rates rise, the first Spanish region to do so since curbs were eased earlier in the year.In municipalities where the infection rate is above 150 per 100,000 inhabitants, the government will limit large public sports or other events where people can eat or drink, regional health chief Gotzone Sagardui said. The region will request permission from the Basque Supreme Court to implement a Covid passport requirement for access to restaurants and nightclubs, she said. “We have to reinforce the measures so that we do not have to take a step back,” Sagardui said. “We have to be vigilant.” The region’s infection rate rose this week to the highest in two months.Pfizer allows generic versions of pill Pfizer reached a licensing agreement that will allow generic-drug manufacturers to produce inexpensive versions of its Covid-19 pill for 95 low- and middle-income countries, following a similar move by Merck.Pfizer said it had signed an agreement with the United Nations-backed Medicines Patent Pool to license the experimental pill, once it is authorised by regulators, to generic companies that can supply it to countries that account for roughly 53% of the world population. Russia expects Sputnik approval by year-end Russia’s Sputnik V Covid-19 vaccine is on track to be approved by the World Health Organization by year-end, according to the head of the Russian Direct Investment Fund. “We are just going through some bureaucratic procedures,” RDIF Chief Executive Officer Kirill Dmitriev said on Bloomberg TV. Japan to shorten quarantine for J&J recipients Japan is planning to make recipients of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine eligible for relaxed quarantine rules that already apply to international business travellers inoculated with the AstraZeneca, Pfizer and Moderna shots, Nikkei reported, without specifying how it obtained the information. Beijing cuts flights from high-risk capitals China cut Beijing flights to one a day from provincial capitals in regions actively fighting outbreaks, according to a briefing held by the Beijing city government. Hong Kong Sevens postponed Rugby fans will have to wait even longer for the Hong Kong Sevens to return as the city tightened existing virus rules in an effort to reopen borders with Mainland China. The three-day event, which offers the sport’s biggest prize purse, was moved from the traditional April dates to November 4-6. The event was cancelled last year, for the first time since its 1976 debut. Japan leads G7 in shots Japan – which started doling out immunisations months after the US – now has the highest inoculation rate among the Group of Seven nations, and it did it without mandates of any kind. The country fully inoculated 75.5% of its population of 126 million people as of November 14, according to Our World in Data, an online scientific publication that uses population statistics from the United Nations. The achievement pushed Japan ahead of Canada.Japan reported 79 new cases, the lowest since June 23, 2020, and one death on Monday.France on alert as infections rise France is on alert as infections rise, government spokesman Gabriel Attal said in an interview on France Inter radio. The situation is better than in neighbouring countries, however, and the government doesn’t plan fresh lockdown measures, he said. “We are in a state of alert,” he said. “The number of infections rose very strongly again last week, up almost 50%.” France’s high vaccination rate and the early implementation of its health pass will help the country manage the crisis during the winter, Attal said. Italy requires Covid passes for fast trains As of Tuesday, passengers on high-speed trains in Italy will be required to present green pass certification before boarding, meaning they are either vaccinated or have a negative coronavirus test. Trains will stop in case travellers show symptoms of infection.Under new travel rules approved by the Health Ministry on Monday, taxi travel will be limited to two passengers, except for people in the same household.German virus deaths spike Germany reported another increase in its nationwide seven-day incidence, with the number of new infections per 100,000 inhabitants climbing to a record 312.4, according to the Robert Koch Institute. The number of deaths rose by 265, the highest one-day increase since May 27. New cases stood at 32,048, up from 21,832 a week ago. Chancellor Angela Merkel and Olaf Scholz – the Social Democrat set to succeed her next month – will hold a video conference with German regional leaders on Thursday to discuss steps to contain the latest wave.Australia to face bill for side effects Australia’s government may face a more than A$50-million ($37-million) bill related to its Covid-19 vaccination programme, as thousands of people register for compensation for health issues related to their inoculations, the Sydney Morning Herald reported.More than 10,000 people have registered for a government programme to be compensated for lost income after being hospitalised for rare but significant side effects from the jab, the paper reported, citing official data. Compensation starts from A$5,000, meaning the programme would cost at least A$50-million should each claim be approved.Moderna nears deal to supply CovaxModerna is nearing an agreement to supply millions of doses of its Covid-19 vaccine to low- and middle-income countries next year, Politico reported, citing two unidentified people with knowledge of the matter.Moderna would sell its vaccine at around $7 per dose and a formal announcement could be made in the coming weeks, it said.China infections drop for second day China’s daily infections dropped sharply for a second day. Only 13 were reported on Tuesday, including two asymptomatic ones, compared with close to 100 daily last week.Authorities worked on extinguishing flare-ups in the northern border town of Heihe and an outbreak in the northeast port city of Dalian, where tens of thousands of university students were put under lockdown.Hong Kong defends Dimon’s quarantine-free visit JPMorgan Chase Chief Executive Officer Jamie Dimon was allowed to skip Hong Kong’s 21-day hotel quarantine on a visit because of the importance of the bank’s operations to the Asian financial hub, said Carrie Lam, the city’s chief executive.The risk is “totally manageable,” she said.Dimon skipped stringent quarantine requirements during his first visit to Asia in two and a half years, saying the restrictions were making it harder for the Wall Street bank to retain talent. He arrived in Hong Kong on Monday for a 32-hour stay. Hong Kong to consider stricter measures on aircrew Hong Kong will implement stricter restrictions on aircrew if necessary, Chief Executive Carrie Lam told reporters.Current cases linked to crew won’t affect Hong Kong’s talks about quarantine-free travel with China for now, she said. The government is in contact with airlines and asked crew to reduce their activities after arrival in the city.Sing Tao reported earlier that the government is planning to require all returning aircrew to quarantine at home for 14 days after returning to the city.Cathay Pacific also tightened crew restrictions, including limiting them to two hours of essential activities outside their homes in the first three days after return, the newspaper reported, citing an internal memo. DM– With assistance from Peter Laca, Simone Silvan, Jinshan Hong, Dong Lyu, Alfred Liu, Felix Tam, Andreo Calonzo, Heejin Kim, Anirban Nag, Eduard Gismatullin, Matthew Burgess, Kanoko Matsuyama, Stefan Nicola, Flavia Rotondi, Peter Flanagan and Se Young Lee."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receiveBusinessTechDiscovery, Sanlam and other businesses in South Africa have announced plans to mandate Covid-19 vaccination for employees.If businesses are doing it, can the trustees or directors of your community housing scheme do it? Can residents or their visitors be compelled to produce proof of vaccination before entering the complex or making use of common facilities like the swimming pool, gym or clubhouse?According to specialist community schemes attorney and BBM Law director, Marina Constas, the answer is most likely no.“If organisations and some restaurants are saying that staff and patrons must produce proof of vaccination in order to work in the office or dine in the establishment, it may seem reasonable, sensible and even necessary for bodies corporate and homeowners association members to expect the same from the residents and visitors to community housing schemes like sectional title complexes, apartment blocks, residential estates and retirement villages,” she said.“However, I believe they would be overreaching and unlikely to succeed in implementing a vaccine mandate.”Constas said that common property is owned by all members of the body corporate – all owners in the complex. Every owner has an undivided share of the complex’s common property and cannot be prevented from using it, she said.“Right now, no definitive decision has been made by the High Court in South Africa regarding vaccine mandates. While companies are exercising their right to mandate vaccines for their staff, the fact of the matter is that we do not yet have specific laws or Court decisions on mandatory vaccines in relation to the fight against Covid-19.“Without a relevant law such as a public health order or a valid by-law, there would be no legal basis for sectional title trustees or homeowners association directors to mandate vaccination among residents in their community scheme or for visitors.”Constas said that they may consider adding this to the complex rules but that can be challenged on the basis that rules must be reasonable and not discriminatory.“If health issues or religious beliefs are valid reasons not to have the Covid vaccine, then it is possible that a blanket mandatory vaccination rule could be construed as discriminatory in some cases.”There are also issues around the protection of personal information to be considered, she said.“With the enactment of the Protection of Personal Information (POPI) Act, every community housing scheme must have a POPI policy.“It must specify the type of personal information that the complex collects and holds, as well as how the complex collects and stores the personal information of residents and visitors. Could this be expanded to include the personal medical information of residents and visitors, like their vaccination status? Right now, there is no legal basis for this.”The position of the trusteesConstas said that trustees seeking to implement vaccine mandates may consider the Sectional Titles Schemes Management Act’s stipulation that every sectional title body corporate must act in the best interests of the body corporate and for the benefit of the owners of units in the scheme.Section 7 of the Act delegates this responsibility to trustees, who may argue that a vaccine mandate is in everyone’s best interests and benefits the owners of units. Since the Act does not specify what these ‘best interests’ are, it could be open to interpretation, she said.This is a very complex issue. The trustees and directors of community housing schemes have a vital role to play in ending this pandemic and must ensure that they comply with regulations and meet their obligations, Constas said.“They have an obligation to take all reasonable steps to ensure that a resident does not contravene the law, and this includes the Covid-19 restrictions and regulations.”However, the community scheme cannot exceed its powers, and make different or conflicting rules or directives contrary to the national legislation, which is the Disaster Management Act 57 of 2002 and Regulations, as well as the Community Schemes Ombud’s Directives, she said.“In my view, a vaccine mandate for residents or a blanket refusal to have non-vaccinated visitors in the building would be unreasonable. However, ensuring that legally required safety measures such as facemasks, hand sanitising and limited numbers at gatherings are enforced is not just reasonable, but is an obligation for trustees, bodies corporate and homeowners associations.”Read: This coastal area in South Africa is facing stock shortages as more people semigrateComments section policy:BusinessTechSouth Africa’s courts recently dealt with the case of an employee who did not follow Covid-19 regulations at work and was subsequently dismissed.In this case, the employee was an assistant butchery manager employed at the applicant, noted Werksmans Attorneys.He was also a member of the applicant’s in-house ‘Coronavirus Site Committee’ and was responsible for, among others, informing other employees of the procedure to be followed if they were exposed to Covid-19 as well as symptoms they should be aware of.The employee used to travel to and from work with a colleague who had exhibited Covid-19 symptoms and was booked off from work for four days. His colleague was admitted to a hospital a few days later and was told that he had tested positive for the virus.At the time that his colleague initially fell ill, the employee began experiencing chest pains, headaches and coughs. He was booked off work between 6 – 10 July 2020. He returned to work despite his symptoms, and even after he became aware that his travelling partner and colleague tested positive for Covid-19.The employee underwent a Covid-19 test on 5 August 2020 and was informed on 9 August 2020 that he had tested positive. However, the employee had still reported for work on 7, 9 and 10 August 2020. In fact, he personally came to the employer’s premises to hand in his positive results.The employee was observed on video footage at the workplace hugging a colleague a day after he had tested positive. The colleague he was hugging had recently experienced post-surgery complications. The video footage also showed the employee walking around the workplace without a mask.DismissedWerksmans noted that the employee was charged with:The employee was subsequently dismissed for his actions. Following his dismissal, the employee referred an unfair dismissal dispute to the CCMA on the grounds, among others, that he had not been provided with any clear direction or instruction from the employer and that he was ‘subjected to victimisation’.The CCMA held that the employee was required to inform the employer that he underwent a Covid-19 test and was guilty of failing to report his test.The employee was also found to be grossly negligent and ‘extremely irresponsible’ as he had reported for duty after he received a positive Covid-19 test result, failed to inform the employer of the same, hugged fellow employees and walked around the workplace without a mask on.However, the CCMA held that in the circumstances, the sanction of dismissal was not appropriate considering the employer’s disciplinary code, Werksmans said.“The conduct, as exhibited by the employee called for the sanction of a final written warning in terms of the disciplinary code.“As the employer could not justify the sanction of dismissal, the CCMA held that it was substantively unfair and ordered that the employee be reinstated without back-pay and a final written warning be placed on his record.”Labour Court’s rulingOn review, the Labour Court held that the findings made by the CCMA commissioner were entirely disconnected from the evidence that was placed before him.“The Commissioner had concluded that the employee’s actions were ‘extremely irresponsible’ in the context of the Covid-19 pandemic and this, the court stated, should have confirmed the sanction of dismissal and that the employer’s disciplinary code was merely a guideline insofar as issued of sanctions were concerned,” Werksmans said.Ultimately, the court held that the dismissal of the employee was appropriate given the fact that:The court concluded that at no point was the employee victimised. In fact, all the evidence put forward by the employer pointed to the employee being grossly negligent, reckless and dishonest. Therefore, the trust and working relationship between the employer and employer could no longer be sustainable.The court set aside the commissioner’s award and held that the employee’s dismissal was substantively fair.“This case emphasises the obligation placed on employees to always abide by Covid-19 health and safety protocols in the workplace, as the failure to do so may result in termination of their employment,” Werksmans said.Read: Health minister on vaccine targets and a fourth Covid-19 wave in South AfricaComments section policy:The MSC Orchestra is due to embark on a 5-day voyage on Monday after a prolonged absence from South African shores. MSC Cruises previously said it would welcome both vaccinated and unvaccinated guests on board but has now changed its tune. South Africa’s summer cruise season hangs in the balance. With the recent discovery of the highly mutated Omicron variant and a sudden surge in Covid-19 infections hastening the fourth wave, an anticipated move to a higher level of lockdown could leave cruise lines high and dry. The first passenger ship to return to South Africa since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, Europa, docked in Cape Town on Tuesday. What was meant to signal a joyous restart for the industry, fit with a ribbon-cutting ceremony, was overshadowed by Omicron and mounting international travel bans imposed on South Africa.Passengers aboard Europa, which sailed from Namibia to Cape Town, have been transported directly to the airport for return flights home. Others were prohibited from disembarking and stayed on board for the return journey, according to Reuters. Despite South Africa’s 2021/22 cruise season getting off to a shaky start with the restricted arrival of Europa, MSC Cruises remains confident of its 6 December restart. The MSC Orchestra, with its 1,275 cabins, is set to depart Durban’s newly finished R200 million cruise terminal on Monday. Passengers can disembark in Pomene, Mozambique, on Wednesday, before completing the return journey to South Africa, arriving back in Durban on Friday. In confirming the 5-day trip back in October, MSC Cruises announced that it would welcome both vaccinated and unvaccinated guests on board. Unvaccinated guests would, however, need to “undergo an antigen lateral flow test at the embarkation port” at a cost of R300 per person, with the exception being those under 18 years of age. Following the detection of the Omicron variant, MSC Cruises updated its health and safety requirements on Wednesday. All guests for the 2021/22 local cruise season must now be fully vaccinated against Covid-19 and also provide a negative Covid-19 PCR test result. “South Africa is currently seeing an increase in infection rates ashore and to ensure the wellbeing of those on board our ship and at the communities we call, our preventative measures again demonstrates that health and safety is our number one priority,” said Ross Volk, the managing director of MSC Cruises South Africa.All passengers older than 2-years-old aboard MSC ships will need to provide a certificate of a negative Covid-19 PCR test taken within 72 hours before embarkation. All guests older than 12-years-old will need to be vaccinated against Covid-19.Passengers between the ages of 12 and 17 years will be considered fully vaccinated if they have received one dose of an accredited vaccine. Those older than 17 are considered fully vaccinated against Covid-19 once they’ve received the full set shots more than 14 days before the start of their journey. Test results and vaccination certificates must be presented at the cruise terminal before embarkation in either a paper or electronic format.Unvaccinated passengers who were already booked to set sail on Monday, can opt to either postpone their holiday with a voucher for a future cruise at a later date or request a refund.All passengers will also be required to have travel insurance, which covers any Covid-19 related risks, including cancellation, repatriation, and medical expenses.Note: The information contained in this article is correct at the time of publication. Due to the nature of the Covid-19 pandemic and the resurgence of cases in South Africa, travel plans may be changed or cancelled at short notice.(Compiled by Luke Daniel)Get the best of our site delivered to your inbox every day.
                                            These fatalities - recorded over the past 24 hours - take the country's official death toll to 89,484. 
                                        JOHANNESBURG - Eight more people have died in South Africa after contracting the coronavirus. These fatalities - recorded over the past 24 hours - take the country's official death toll to 89,484. Over that same time frame, 262 tests also came back positive. Government has set the target of inoculating at least 30 million people or 70% of the population by the end of the year. So far, 23.9 million jabs have been administered, however, many people still need to go back and get their Pfizer shots.As of today the cumulative number of #COVID19 cases identified in SA is 2 925 939 with 262 new cases reported. Today 8 deaths have been reported bringing the total to 89 484 deaths. The cumulative number of recoveries now stand at 2 819 688 with a recovery rate of 96,4% pic.twitter.com/7vfXQzJENA





This website is using a security service to protect itself from online attacks.
Cloudflare Ray ID: 6b868cf37bd51b5a
•
Your IP: 105.163.0.98
•
Performance & security by Cloudflare
BusinessTechHealth minister Dr Joe Phaahla has announced an ‘upgraded’ Covid-19 certificate for South Africa, which will be officially be introduced next week.In a media briefing on Friday morning (12 November), Phaahla said that the change will see the QR codes embedded on the digital certificates ‘go live’. This will allow third-party groups to use the QR codes to verify the validity of the info on the card, he said.The certificate is currently only available to people fully vaccinated against Covid-19, with users required to fill in their contact details, including their ID number and Electronic Vaccination Data System (EVDS) code.Upon entering these details, users will be sent a one-time PIN confirming the authenticity of the information they have provided. The PIN can then be entered to access the final, digital Covid-19 vaccine certificate.The digital pass system can be used to show vaccination status to facilitate travel, access to establishments, gatherings and other forms of activity.The opening up of the QR code to third parties will allow private businesses and the government to better monitor who has or has not been vaccinated and could pave the way for the further reopening of sports and other events in South Africa.It could also make it easier to monitor areas where mandatory Covid-19 vaccination policies have been put in place.The Department of Health previously said that further upgrades to the certificates will be rolled out in a phased manner – including the scannable QR code and digital (cryptographic) signatures.Preparing for the fourth waveWhile South Africa’s Covid-19 infections remain low, Phaahla said that the government was now preparing for an expected fourth wave of cases.He added that the government is doing everything possible to make sure it is delayed and that when it comes, it has far less impact.“The health facilities’ readiness in preparation for the fourth wave is addressing areas such as availability of oxygen supply, of which our bulk supplier has already finalised contingency plans to make sure that we do have enough supply of oxygen,” he said.Phaahla said that over the last four weeks, the Covid-19 infections in the country have remained very stable, with daily infection rates keeping at a very low base of between 200 and 500 new infections per day.“The positivity rate also remained at an average of 1%, as of yesterday we had relatively high just over 16,000 active cases, a reduced number compared to the peak of the third wave.”“The number of patients in hospitals remains relatively high but lower than the peak of the third wave, just over 3,000 patients remaining in hospitals with just over 270 in high care and over 400 in ICU,” he said.On Thursday (11 November), South Africa reported 356 new cases of Covid-19, taking the total reported to 2,924,978.Deaths have reached 89,452 (+17), while recoveries have climbed to 2,819,130, leaving the country with a balance of 16,396 active cases. The total number of vaccines administered is 23,684,440 (+143,893).Read: New e-visa system planned for South Africa – what you should knowComments section policy:
                                            Eskom announced earlier that stage 2 power cuts will persist throughout the week until next Saturday.
                                        JOHANNESBURG - As South Africans prepare for a week of blackouts some have bemoaned the return of load shedding, fuel price hikes and new COVID-19 cases.Eskom announced earlier that stage 2 power cuts will persist throughout the week until next Saturday.The power cuts are due to the ongoing insufficient generation capacity and the inability to replenish emergency reserves - with the utility warning that the system remains volatile and unpredictable meaning higher stages of power cuts could be required."Prior to the elections there was no load shedding, after everyone has cast their votes then load shedding comes. Is it a coincidence? I don't think so" said a frustrated resident.Local government elections are over, and the country has seen a quick return to issues such as load shedding.Eskom said over the past two days it's had to use its emergency generating reserves, hampering the recovery of dam levels and depleting already low diesel levels.While an incident in Zambia has affected the entire Southern African power pool."During this incident the imported power from the Cahora Bassa Dam in Mozambique is being reduced by 1000 megawatts, while a Tutuka generator also tripped  furthermore a unit at Tutuka Power station was forced to shut down while the were further delays in returning a unit each at Lethabo and Majuba Power Station" said spokesperson Sikonathi MantshantshaAlong with pressures from the COVID-19 pandemic, fuel price hikes and a high unemployment rate - some residents said the country cannot afford a full week of blackoutsEskom said it cannot rule out higher stages of load shedding should the situation worsen.





Please enter a term before submitting your search.
        Access provided by 
If you don't remember your password, you can reset it by entering your email address and clicking the Reset Password button. You will then receive an email that contains a secure link for resetting your passwordIf the address matches a valid account an email will be sent to __email__ with instructions for resetting your passwordDOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02758-6
COVID-19 Resource Centre

Access the latest 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) content from across The Lancet journals as it is published.
  
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. To update your cookie settings, please visit the Cookie Preference Center for this site.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. except certain content provided by third parties. The content on this site is intended for healthcare professionals.


Privacy Policy   Terms and Conditions



BusinessTechSouth Africa is in talks with Pfizer and Merck to gain access to their Covid-19 treatment pills as the omicron variant spreads across the country and cases almost double.The country wants one of them to potentially produce the therapeutics in South Africa, Nicholas Crisp, deputy director-general in South Africa’s Department of Health, said in response to a lawmaker’s question on Wednesday.“We are discussing those two and other matters with manufacturers so that we understand what it is they are selling, what it does,” he said.South Africa has the highest number of confirmed cases of Covid-19 in Africa, with about 3 million infections and around 90,000 deaths officially attributed to the disease. The onset of omicron is triggering a fourth wave of infections. The medications are being considered by the National Essential Medicines List Committee as are their economic value, he said.“We have done a numbers estimate with our colleagues in the provinces of the volumes we think we will be able to use of those two medications,” he said.Merck and Pfizer are seeking approval from the US Food and Drug Administration for emergency use of their pills, known as molnupiravir and Paxlovid respectively.South Africa recorded 8,561 infections on Wednesday, compared with 4,373 a day earlier, according to the National Institute for Communicable Diseases.Read: Omicron spreads as South Africa’s daily cases almost doubleComments section policy:The US revised its travel advisory for Japan to Level 1, the agency’s lowest risk assessment.The antidepressant Prozac appeared to reduce the risk of death in patients with severe Covid-19 who were admitted to the hospital, according to a small, observational study.New York City asked healthcare providers to give a booster to anyone who requests one, as new cases pick up steam. “There should be no barriers to accessing a booster shot,” said Health Commissioner Dave Chokshi.A new wave of infections across Europe showed no sign of slowing. Austria began a lockdown for people who haven’t been vaccinated, while Ireland got set to recommend people start working from home again. The UK expanded its booster programme, and Prime Minister Boris Johnson said that he wouldn’t rule out another wave of lockdowns this winter if infection rates jump. Key developments CDC puts Japan travel notice at lowest level The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention revised its travel advisory on Japan to Level 1, the agency’s lowest risk assessment. Travellers should be fully vaccinated, wear masks and maintain social distancing, the CDC said.Amazon, California reach worker safety deal Amazon.com will step up efforts to inform warehouse workers in California about safety protocols and outbreaks under a deal reached with the state’s Attorney General.The accord requires that the retailer notify workers within a day and local health agencies within 48 hours about new cases in the workplace. The state filed suit against Amazon in state court, along with a request that a judge approve the settlement.Boris Johnson leaves lockdowns on the table Asked if there could be another lockdown this Christmas, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson warned: “Clearly, we cannot rule anything out.” While saying that current data show no need for more restrictions, “History shows we cannot afford to be complacent,” he said. Last month Johnson said there would be no curbs over the holidays.England Chief Medical Officer Chris Whitty said large parts of the National Health Service are under “very significant pressure” and are likely to remain so over the winter.Prozac may reduce death risk, study says The antidepressant popularly known as Prozac appeared to reduce the risk of death in patients admitted to the hospital with severe Covid-19, according to a study published in the Jama Network Open journal. Of the 470 patients taking fluoxetine, Prozac’s chemical name, 9.8% died. That compared with more than 13% of patients with similar characteristics not receiving any antidepressant.A reviewer of the study cautioned that it was observational and too small to establish cause and effect. Also, previous health conditions weren’t available for all patients, another limitation, the reviewer said.Singapore new cases rise to 2,069 Singapore recorded 2,069 new cases, up from 1,723 on Sunday. The Health Ministry reported that 1,533 patients were hospitalised, 255 of whom required oxygen supplementation. Eight people died from Covid-19 complications on November 15.Italy’s police probe anti-vaccine extremists The Italian police identified 17 anti-vaccine and anti-green pass extremists affiliated with the “Enough of the Dictatorship” Telegram chat. The protesters are under investigation for incitement to commit crimes against doctors, journalists, scientists and government officials in the country, including Prime Minister Mario Draghi, authorities said.New York City urges adults to get booster shot New York City encouraged health care providers to allow all adults to get the booster shot as the city grapples with a rise in virus cases.People aged 18 and over who received a Moderna or Pfizer dose at least six months ago or the Johnson & Johnson vaccine at least two months ago are eligible for the booster, city Health Commissioner Dave Chokshi said.More than 630,000 New Yorkers have already received a booster shot. The percentage of positive cases on a seven-day-average rose to 1.66% on Saturday, up from 1.36% on October 31, according to city data.Cyprus backs boosters for all adults Cyprus approved a booster for everyone above the age of 18, the country’s Health Ministry said. Some 67% of the population has been fully vaccinated and the extra shot will be administered six months after the second one.Singapore reopens travel for fully vaccinated people Singapore said it would allow quarantine-free travel for fully vaccinated people from countries including India, Indonesia and Saudi Arabia. The city-state is looking to reclaim its position as an international aviation hub and move past the pandemic that has kept its 5.7 million residents home for more than a year. Inoculated visitors from Indonesia and India will be able to enter from November 29, while those from Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar will be welcome from December 6 without having to quarantine, the Health Ministry said. Unvaccinated children 12 and under can accompany eligible adults.Italy cases, deaths creep up  Italy reported 15,223 more new Covid-19 cases and 105 more deaths last week than the week before, according to data released by the government. The country’s figure of 51,318 new infections was the highest since May. Compared with the same week one year ago, Italy reported 190,763 fewer new infections, though tests conducted increased by almost two million. The 390 recorded Covid deaths were less than 11% of the total recorded in the same week of 2020.EU expands vaccine pass recognition The European Commission recognises the Covid-19 certificates issued by Georgia, Moldova, New Zealand and Serbia. At the same time, the four countries agreed to accept the EU’s digital certificate for travel.UK offers boosters to people in their forties The UK is expanding its Covid-19 booster programme to younger people as the country seeks to head off another wave of infections this winter. A third vaccine dose will be available to people aged 40 to 49 starting six months after their second shot, the government said on Monday. Previously, only those over 50 and other vulnerable groups were eligible. So far, more than 12 million people have received a booster. The government is also recommending a second shot of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine for 16 and 17-year-olds. That inoculation will be given at least 12 weeks after the initial dose or a Covid infection, whichever is later. Indonesia cases fall to 18-month low Indonesia reported 221 new Covid-19 cases on Monday, the fewest since April last year, with 11 deaths. While the country has identified so-called Delta sub-variants among its active cases, Health Minister Budi Gunadi Sadikin said in a press briefing that the government is confident there is now sufficient immunity, with about 40% of the targeted population fully vaccinated.More than 130 million Indonesians have received at least their first dose, nearly half of the total. The country is still monitoring the virus situation in other countries before reopening borders further, said Coordinating Minister of Economic Affairs Airlangga Hartarto.Austria slaps restrictions on unvaccinated Austrian police were ordered to stop individuals on the streets to enforce a lockdown on people who have refused a Covid-19 shot, with Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg condemning the country’s “shamefully low vaccination rate”. Starting on Monday, people who can’t show proof of vaccination and are caught going into cinemas, gyms or retail stores face fines starting at €500. Business owners could be tapped for €3,600, the Interior Ministry announced on Sunday.  German parties mull over curbs for unvaccinated The three German parties negotiating a government coalition – the Social Democrats, Free Democrats and Greens – are planning to tighten restrictions on unvaccinated people, according to Oliver Krischer, the deputy head of the Greens caucus in the German Parliament.People who have refused a Covid shot will have to expect curbs on contact, he said Monday on ZDF television. Current extraordinary measures to combat the spread of the virus will expire on November 25, and the coalition parties are planning to present new legislation later this week.Germany reported a record seven-day incidence rate of 303 cases per 100,000 inhabitants, according to the Robert Koch-Institut.Ireland may encourage people to stay home Ireland’s government is set to recommend people go back to working from home where possible, the Irish Times reported.The country has seen the most new cases since January in recent days. Still, the government is unlikely to push through more severe restrictions for now, with hospitalisations about a third of what they were at the start of the year.Pfizer shot generates most antibodies: study A study testing immune responses to four Covid vaccines found that Pfizer’s shot yielded the strongest result. “Relatively low” antibody concentrations were stimulated by the Sinopharm and Sputnik V vaccines, intermediate levels for the AstraZeneca vaccine, and the highest values for the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, a study in the journal Cell Host and Microbe showed. New York-based Pfizer’s vaccine is expected to generate $36-billion in revenue this year. Read more here about how the company’s chief executive officer, Albert Bourla, has been the most outspoken among fellow CEOs in resisting calls to make the technology behind inoculations more widely available.Some Cathay air crew face 21-day quarantine Cathay Pacific Airway said any crew members who stayed in Frankfurt this month will need to quarantine for 21 days in a government facility after three pilots on cargo flights from the German financial hub were confirmed Covid cases. The airline will suspend layovers in the German city for cargo crew and is requiring crew members to take daily Covid tests.Hong Kong, the world’s busiest airport for international air cargo, is stepping up measures to try to contain the spread of the virus as part of its Covid Zero push to reopen its border with mainland China, which is also pursuing an elimination strategy. The stricter measures are upsetting some staff, however, with several taking to social media to document their experience.India reopens to foreign tourists after 20 months India is allowing quarantine-free entry to fully inoculated travellers from 99 reciprocating countries after halting tourist visas in March last year. The government only requires such tourists to monitor their health for 14 days after arrival.The country’s immunisation campaign has also gathered pace, with more than a billion vaccine doses administered, and antibody surveys suggest that most Indians have already been exposed to Covid. While national infection levels have in recent weeks touched lows last seen earlier in the year, there are concerns that the easing of curbs risks a complacency similar to when India experienced an ebb between its two major waves. China’s Dalian starts citywide testing The northeastern Chinese city of Dalian on Sunday started a citywide round of Covid testing, Xinhua reported, as it battles the biggest flareup in the country’s current outbreak.Tens of thousands of university students are under lockdown after the city became the latest hotspot of infections. The momentum of the current flare-up is slowing and the epidemic is generally “under control”, the city government said on Sunday.Japan plans faster booster roll-out  Japan is preparing to make vaccine booster shots available six months after a second inoculation, NHK reports, citing unidentified sources. Under current plans, fully vaccinated people would be eligible for boosters after eight months.The move follows reports from other countries that vaccine efficacy starts to decline after six months, according to NHK. Japan is due to start its booster roll-out next month, following the example of countries including the US, UK, China and Singapore.Cambodia allows quarantine-free travel Cambodia is removing quarantine requirements for all vaccinated travellers from Monday. New arrivals will be required to take a rapid antigen test, and must bring proof of inoculation and a negative Covid test within 72 hours of boarding a flight.In October, neighbouring Thailand announced a similar reopening for vaccinated visitors from more than 60 countries. However, very few places have reciprocated, so many international travellers will still face quarantine on return from either of the Southeast Asian nations. For more on the destinations that are open to visitors, explore the Bloomberg Covid Travel Tracker.Lawsuit fails to block US military shot mandate  The Biden administration’s push for vaccine mandates, under fire in courts around the nation, has survived a legal challenge headed by former Trump campaign lawyer Sidney Powell over vaccines in the military.Powell, who tried to flip the result of the 2020 presidential election with a series of failed lawsuits based on conspiracy theories, lost a request to temporarily block the Pentagon’s Covid-19 vaccine mandate. The lawsuit was filed on behalf of disgruntled service members.The suit didn’t come close to meeting the high bar for winning a preliminary injunction, US District Judge Allen Winsor ruled on Friday in Pensacola, Florida. DM– With assistance from Max Zimmerman, Arys Aditya, Peter Flanagan and Flavia Rotondi."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receiveSA recorded 585 new Covid-19 cases in the past 24 hours, the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) said on Thursday.Gauteng again bore the brunt of the new cases, with 372 of the infections being confirmed in the province. The next worst-affected province was KwaZulu-Natal, with 54 cases. The Western Cape was next with 40.This means that there have been 2,927,499 confirmed cases since the outbreak of the virus.The NICD said that, according to health department data, there were also 40 Covid-19 related deaths reported in the past day, bringing total fatalities to 89,555 to date.Data also showed that there were 33 new hospital admissions in the past day, meaning that 3,504 people are  in hospital for Covid-19 related treatment. TimesLIVEWould you like to comment on this article or view other readers' comments? Register (it’s quick and free) or sign in now.Please read our Comment Policy before commenting. Read more at the SA government's  online coronavirus portal  or use the 24-hour public hotline: 0800 029 999 Saturday, 04 December19 NovEight months ago, just under half a million healthcare workers in South Africa were vaccinated with one shot of Johnson & Johnson (J&J) in the country’s Sisonke implementation trial. Now they’re getting an extra shot of the J&J jab in a new leg of the study.The South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (Sahpra) approved the Sisonke researchers’ request to give health workers a second Johnson and Johnson jab.Health workers have been eligible for a booster since 9 November 2021.Each Covid vaccine comes with its own recommended dose.You’re considered fully vaccinated after just one shot of the J&J jab.Those who get the Pfizer vaccine are considered completely immunised after getting two shots.Some countries like the United States and Israel, have decided to give an extra shot to some of those who are already fully vaccinated.Extra doses are called “booster” shots. They are additional jabs given to people already fully immunised.Some people may not be able to build up enough protection after receiving the standard number of vaccine doses.Elderly people or those with weak immune systems may need extra shots.The need for boosters depends on what a country’s Covid outbreak looks like, which variants are circulating and how well the vaccines in use protect people against those variants.The World Health Organisation (WHO) says there are three things nations should look at when deciding on booster shots.The first is waning immunity. There is a possibility that the protection against falling very ill with Covid may begin to drop over time.But there is not yet enough data on the immune response to the jabs to know for sure if vaccines’ protection becomes weaker over time.The WHO says we also need to look at whether vaccines are able to prevent people from getting infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19.Real-life data so far has been promising. It shows that fully vaccinated people are far less likely to get infected with SARS-CoV-2.No jabs are, however, 100% effective in preventing infection with SARS-CoV-2. the virus which causes Covid-19. So you can still get Covid after you've been fully vaccinated. The jabs, however, do make you less likely to get infected.In October, the US Food and Drug Administration cleared J&J’s jab to be used as a booster.The US regulator also approved the “mix and match” use of vaccines.This means people who received Pfizer’s two-dose vaccine initially would be able to get J&J for their third (booster) dose.Those who got J&J’s one-dose vaccine can be given a Pfizer shot as their second dose.A preprint study showed that people who started off with a J&J shot were better off with a Pfizer booster.But it didn’t make a difference what jab was used as a booster for those who were first immunised with Pfizer.The health department announced in October that it will offer Pfizer jabs as second doses to people from South Africa who had received a first jab of the Moderna or AstraZeneca vaccines in a different country.Sahpra has, however, not yet approved a mix and match policy for South Africa.The health department says health workers who participated in the Sisonke study, will - eventually be able to choose between a J&J and Pfizer booster as a second shot after a 1st J&J jab, but no final details have been announced.14h agoThe Daily Dose
                    Your daily dose of health info and news.
                BusinessTechOld Mutual Ltd will make it mandatory for all its employees in South Africa to be vaccinated against Covid-19.“Vaccinations are proving to be the key to unlocking economic activity, returning life to a more normal rhythm, preventing severe illness and death, decreasing transmission rates, as well as reducing the emergence of new variants of the disease,” chief executive officer Iain Williamson said in an emailed statement on Friday.The policy will come into effect from January and staff will be required to submit proof of their vaccination status to the insurance company.Deputy President David Mabuza meanwhile has expressed concern that the country could fail to vaccinate close to 40 million citizens by the end of 2021, as South Africa races to reach herd immunity.“I’m not very sure whether we are going to reach our targets, the 70% that we are yearning for. It looks far-fetched. I’m sure that we are going to revise our targets,” he acknowledged on Friday.According to the latest statistics, South Africa has distributed the Covid-19 vaccine to over 13 million or 33.21% of the adult population out of the 39 798 201 or 70% government is aiming to reach.“It’s quite clear that we’re left with a few weeks, and we are almost somewhere about 40% and 70% is a very tall order to reach.”Leading the vaccination social mobilisation campaign in Gqeberha, in the Eastern Cape, the Deputy President has once again used his voice to encourage people to take the lifesaving vaccine, as a number of South Africans refuse the Covid-19 jab.Deputy president Mabuza said citizens needed to visit their nearest vaccination sites for immunisation. “Vaccinate to protect your friends, families, and the prosperity of our country,” he encouraged citizens.According to the deputy president, reaching population immunity should be everyone’s biggest motivation to ensure lives are saved.“We should avoid the possible fourth wave that may be deadly for all the people that are unvaccinated,” he stressed, adding the country had enough shots to cover all the adults.“There is no reason to stay away as vaccination days have been extended to ensure that all of us have access.”Once herd immunity is achieved, the deputy president said it was possible to fully open the economy and ensure that people’s livelihoods are secured.Read: Fourth Covid wave is inevitable: health ministerComments section policy:The Singapore government has to date covered the full costs of medical treatment of Covid-19 patients, in order “to avoid financial considerations adding to public uncertainty and concern when Covid-19 was an emergent and unfamiliar disease”.However, the government has announced that from 8 December 2021 those who are “unvaccinated by choice” will have to start paying for their own Covid-19 treatment on the grounds that “unvaccinated persons make up a sizeable majority of those who require intensive inpatient care, and disproportionately contribute to the strain on our healthcare resources.”Why should it be considered for South Africa?While Covid-19 infection rates in South Africa are currently low, Minister of Health Dr Joe Phaahla has warned of a fourth wave starting in December and urged people to take the vaccine, describing this as the only hope of long-term success in containing the Coronavirus. The Department of Health has set a target of vaccinating at least 70–90% of the adult population (18 and over) by December.However, by 13 November only 13.4 million (33.5%) of the total target population of 39.8-million adults had been vaccinated. South Africa has the capacity to vaccinate more than 300,000 people a day but daily vaccination rates have fallen well below targets. Besides the immediate health care concerns, the low vaccination rates raise broader economic concerns for the country. As Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana highlighted in his Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, “getting more South Africans vaccinated would put the country in a better position to respond effectively to the economic impact brought about by the pandemic.”Various approaches to increasing the vaccination rate are being considered with mandatory vaccination featuring prominently. Business for South Africa has argued that “in our view, a combination of mandatory vaccination policies, as well as incentives, are going to be necessary alongside the demand generation communications and mobilisation campaign to get as many people as possible vaccinated.”The Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA), is also considering mandatory vaccinations for government workers. The Department of Employment and Labour has published a directive that will allow businesses to introduce mandatory vaccinations, subject to certain requirements.However, there are concerns about the legislative basis for mandatory vaccination and the legal firm Webber Wentzel has concluded that “there is currently no legislation that requires all South African citizens to be vaccinated and that vaccination is still a choice and is not mandatory.”There are also concerns that vaccine mandates by employers will have relatively little impact in a country with an official unemployment rate of more than 34%, where many depend on informal work for their livelihoods.Given the low vaccination rates and concerns about mandatory vaccination, should South Africa consider the Singaporean approach of not covering the medical costs of unvaccinated Covid-19 patients in order to encourage vaccination take-up and at the same time internalise the cost of non-vaccination?The Singaporean approach requires those “unvaccinated by choice” to pay for their own Covid-19 treatment. Three key questions need to be addressed in considering whether the approach is suitable for the South African context: (1) What is the evidence demonstrating that full vaccination reduces the risk of Covid-19 related morbidity and treatment requirements? (2) With what level of certainty can we distinguish between those “unvaccinated by choice” and those “unvaccinated by circumstance”; and (3) is the case for making the “unvaccinated by choice” pay for their own treatment fair and justifiable?There is a growing body of evidence confirming that full vaccination significantly reduces the risk of Covid-19 related morbidity and consequently of treatment requirements. For instance, a large Centers for Disease Control and Prevention study in the US showed vaccines to be 84% to 96% effective in preventing Covid-19 related hospitalisation. A similar picture emerges from trends in the United Kingdom.Locally, Discovery Health, South Africa’s largest medical scheme, has reported that the Pfizer vaccine is 92% effective in reducing the risk of hospital admission for Covid-19 and 94% effective in preventing the risk of Covid-19 death. Of 156 Covid-19 patients admitted to Groote Schuur Hospital on 6 September 2021, 153 (98%) were not vaccinated, and none of the 66 patients requiring ICU care or the 32 patients requiring ventilators on that day were vaccinated.The second and third questions must be examined separately for those with and without private medical cover, considering the huge disparities between these groups.For those without private cover, it is difficult to make a case for the Singaporean approach. Because of their socioeconomic profile, geographical distribution and other population characteristics, the risk of being “unvaccinated by circumstances” is high in this population and it would be difficult to identify with certainty those who are “unvaccinated by choice”. Implementing the Singaporean approach would therefore carry a high risk of unnecessarily and unfairly burdening those who are unvaccinated as a result of circumstances.For the population with private cover, the case for adopting the Singaporean approach is much stronger. Based on the profile of the insured population, the accessibility of vaccines is less of an issue and the risk of being “unvaccinated by circumstances” consequently low. It would be reasonable to assume that the vast majority of the unvaccinated in this population, with some exceptions, are “unvaccinated by choice”.The question is whether requiring them to pay for their Covid-19 related treatment is fair and justifiable. At the onset of the pandemic, the Council for Medical Schemes issued Circular 25 of 2020 declaring Covid-19 a Prescribed Minimum Benefit (PMB) condition, and requiring all medical schemes to fund all Covid-19 related costs for consultations, tests, medication, hospitalisation and rehabilitation in full. In terms of this regulation, medical schemes have to cover the costs regardless of vaccination status. Inherent in this arrangement is a substantial cross-subsidy from those who are vaccinated to those who are not vaccinated.While cross-subsidisation by the healthy of the less healthy is a central social solidarity principle of all health insurances, it is questionable whether it is fair and justifiable to cross-subsidise people who knowingly chose to remain high risk, thus abandoning the broader social solidarity principle of protecting others from avoidable harm.In summary, the Covid-19 vaccine substantially reduces the risk of Covid-19 related morbidity and treatment requirements. The case for implementing the Singaporean approach for the South African population without medical cover is weak as it carries a high risk of unnecessarily and unfairly burdening those who are unvaccinated as a result of circumstances. The case for implementing the approach for the population with medical cover is much stronger as there is a far higher probability that the unvaccinated in this group remain “unvaccinated by choice” and the burden of cross-subsidy burden on the vaccinated is unfair and not justifiable.The Singaporean approach could be relatively easily implemented for this population by a review of the Covid-19 PMB. The Council for Medical Schemes could make an adjustment in terms of which the benefit is prescribed only for individuals who have been vaccinated. The change would mandate medical schemes to cover Covid-19 related costs of vaccinated individuals, but allow schemes discretion as to the level of cover provided for non-vaccinated individuals (as for any other non-prescribed benefit).Those unvaccinated by choice would then be obliged to cover any shortfall in their medical costs. While such a measure may impact on a relatively small number of members, it would send a strong signal of government commitment to vaccination to achieve the levels necessary to protect the population. DMGeetesh Solanki is Specialist Scientist at the Health Systems Research Unit, SA Medical Research Council (SAMRC); an Honorary Research Associate in the Health Economics Unit, University of Cape Town and Principal Consultant at NMG Consultants and Actuaries.Vishal Brijlal is a Senior Director at the Clinton Health Access Initiative.Reno Morar is the Chief Operating Officer, University of Cape Town.Judith Cornell was the Director of Institutional Development and Planning (now retired) at the Nelson Mandela School of Public Governance, University of Cape Town, South Africa.The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of their institutions."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receiveThis website is using a security service to protect itself from online attacks.
Cloudflare Ray ID: 6b868d8b8a1fb412
•
Your IP: 105.163.0.98
•
Performance & security by Cloudflare
For travel to the United States on a temporary basis, including tourism, temporary employment, study and exchange.For foreign citizens who want to live permanently in the United States.The Visa Waiver Program (VWP) allows citizens of participating countries* to travel to the United States without a visa for stays of 90 days or less, when they meet all requirements. Alerts and Messages for U.S. visitors to South Africa.U.S. Citizens with emergencies, please call 011 290 3000Outside of Office Hours, contact: 011 290 3000Outside of South Africa: +27 11 290 3000 Learn more about quality higher-education opportunities in the U.S. that you will not find anywhere else in the world. Find the closest American Space in South Africa where you can connect with the U.S. 877 Pretorius StArcadiaPretoriaPhone: +27 (12) 431-4000Fax: +27 (12) 342-2299Other U.S. government agencies work with South Africa, some with offices in the Embassy and some throughout the country.Location: South Africa, countrywideEvent:  On December 6, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will implement a one-day COVID-19 testing requirement for travelers over age two coming to the United States.  Regardless of vaccination status or nationality, any individual coming to the United States must show a negative pre-departure COVID-19 viral test taken the day before they board their flight to the United States.  You must show your negative result to the airline before you board your flight.If you recently recovered from COVID-19, you may instead travel with documentation of recovery from COVID-19 (i.e., your positive COVID-19 viral test result on a sample taken no more than 90 days before the flight’s departure from a foreign country, and a letter from a licensed healthcare provider or a public health official stating that you were cleared to travel).These requirements are for all air passengers two years of age or older boarding a flight from a foreign country to the United States.Actions to Take:  Assistance:By U.S. Mission South Africa | 3 December, 2021 | Categories: AlertU.S. Consulate General DurbanU.S. Consulate General JohannesburgFooter Disclaimer This is the official website of the U.S. Embassy and Consulates in South Africa. External links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views or privacy policies contained therein.
BusinessTechThe South African Medical Association, which represents doctors, said there must be a choice of Covid-19 booster vaccine after Johnson & Johnson won the right to run research on the half a million health workers who took the company’s shot in an initial study.The Sisonke trial, which gave South African health workers a vaccine ahead of a general rollout of the shots, will be extended with health workers offered a second J&J inoculation, the government said last month.SAMA, as the association is known, said it is concerned because of potential evidence that a booster in the form of a messenger ribonucleic acid, or mRNA, vaccine such as those produced by Pfizer is potentially more effective than the second dose of a more traditional vector-based shot, such as that produced by J&J.“What is it that informs the decision to roll out the Sisonke phase 2 trial in isolation?” SAMA said in an open letter to South African Health Minister Joe Phaahla on Wednesday. “Will health care workers be given the right to choose which booster they choose to take?”Vaccine apartheidJ&J’s dose uses a piece of a modified cold virus to stimulate an immune response, while mRNA vaccines use genetic material to instruct cells to defend themselves against the coronavirus.The rollout of the booster trial will begin today and the addition of a choice would delay it by six weeks, said Nicholas Crisp, deputy director-general of the South African health department.  That would mean that health workers wouldn’t get more protection ahead of a possible fourth wave of coronavirus infections starts, he said, adding that a Pfizer boost trial may be carried out later.Because offering Pfizer as an alternative would set the process back “we elected not to go that route,” he said.  “I actually am disappointed in SAMA raising this.”SAMA’s intervention has also created a rift with the South African Medical Research Association, which is working with J&J on the trial.“What they are asking us to do is to experiment further on health workers. They are saying disregard the evidence and conduct a further experiment,” said Glenda Gray, president of the SAMRC and co-lead of the J&J study in South Africa.“We have people who have never conducted a vaccine trial in their life telling the public that one vaccine is better than another and creating a vaccine apartheid.”Read: Health minister on vaccine targets and a fourth Covid-19 wave in South AfricaComments section policy:This website is using a security service to protect itself from online attacks.
Cloudflare Ray ID: 6b868dac7cd95d1b
•
Your IP: 105.163.0.98
•
Performance & security by Cloudflare
Delta Air Lines said its international bookings surged 450% in the six weeks since the US announced it was reopening to fully vaccinated travellers from abroad. At home, the US will be requiring Covid-19 politically contentious vaccinations or at least weekly testing by January 4 for workers at companies with 100 or more employees. US new cases rose 1% in the latest weekly trend, while hospital admissions and deaths linked to Covid-19 are declining, according to latest Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data. The World Health Organization warned European governments to fight back against a surge in cases on the continent that has pushed the region back to the pandemic’s epicentre.   The UK became the first country to approve Merck’s Covid-19 antiviral pill.Key developments Delta Air says international bookings are surging Delta Air Lines said its international point-of-sale bookings increased 450% compared with the six weeks preceding a US announcement on reopening travel.Many international flights are expected to operate at 100% capacity on Monday, the first day of the reopening, the airline said in a statement. The White House said on September 20 that the US would reopen to travellers from countries including much of Europe, China, Brazil and India.US cases rise 1% in CDC’s weekly count  US cases increased by 1.1% during the week through Tuesday compared with the preceding seven days, according to a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report. Covid-related deaths as a share of population on the county level fell 6.8% in the same period. Hospital admissions for Covid-19 fell 7.6% through Monday on a rolling weekly basis. Intensive-care unit utilisation for Covid patients nationwide fell to 15% from 16% a week earlier, the CDC reported on Thursday.Moderna loses best-performer spot in S&P 500  Moderna lost its place as the best performing stock on the S&P 500 Index after lowering its forecast for 2021 Covid-19 vaccine sales.The biotech’s stock sank as much as 20%, the biggest drop since May 2020. The UK’s approval of Merck’s Covid-19 antiviral pill also hit Moderna’s shares. The company now expects sales of $15-billion to $18-billion, down from $20-billion expected earlier this year. WHO warns on pandemic The case surge in Europe despite its access to vaccinations should be a warning for the world, a World Health Organization official said at a media briefing on Thursday.Amid a wrong perception that the pandemic is moving toward the end, governments may be hesitant to make moves that seem like steps backward to their populations, according to Mike Ryan, head of the WHO’s health emergencies programme.“Every country needs to look at its strategic preparedness and response plan and look at the gaps in the system that exist right now and plug those holes,” Ryan said. “Every country needs to ensure they can get through the next few months without systems going into collapse again. In many countries, that will require a course correction and a real focus on ensuring every person has had full vaccination.”Eiffel Tower tourists return A return of US tourists helped bump up the number of visitors to Paris’s Eiffel Tower to pre-Covid-19 levels last month, Agence France-Presse reported, citing the landmark’s operator, Sete.The number of visitors in October topped 20,000 a day and was “better than in 2019 on the weekends”, AFP cited Sete as saying. Over the summer, the site received about 13,000 visitors a day, compared with 25,000 before the health crisis as the numbers were capped by health restrictions – including a 50% limit on the number of people allowed in elevators.Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine effective, South African medical aid study shows The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine helps prevent severe disease among those infected with the Delta variant, according to research involving 1.2 million medical insurance plan members in South Africa.Two weeks after the first dose, the Pfizer vaccine is 73% effective in protecting against hospital admission. Waiting the same period after the second shot raises that to 92%. Unvaccinated members had a five times higher risk of infection and 20 times the risk of dying from complications of an infection.New daily high infections in Greece Greece recorded a new high of daily Covid-19 cases on Thursday, reporting 6,808 infections in the past 24 hours, the most since the beginning of the pandemic. It was the fourth record high in the last five days, while the government announced on Tuesday a number of restrictive measures targeting the unvaccinated people. Greece will on Friday open the platform for everyone above 18 years old to get their booster shot, provided that it has been at least six months since the second one.New York Governor Hochul gives hope on mask removalNew York Governor Kathy Hochul, speaking on Thursday at an AARP event with City & State, said she is in favour of getting rid of school mask mandates when the time is right.“I do want to give parents and kids that sense of hope,” she said. “This is not a permanent situation, the mask will come off.”Hochul said she and the state would continue to work on creative ways to encourage families to get their children vaccinated. There’s no “magic number” on how many children need to be vaccinated before the mask mandates are lifted, Hochul said. “I’ll be waiting for the CDC to help us declare when this is over.”NYC dangles $100 incentive for kids New York City began offering shots for 5- to 11-year-olds on Thursday at city-run sites, where kids are eligible for a $100 incentive, Mayor Bill de Blasio said in a briefing.Next week, each public school with students in the age group will have a vaccine site for at least one day, the mayor said. When asked what threshold of vaccinations will be needed for schools to drop mask requirements, De Blasio said that out of an abundance of caution, schools will keep masking at least in the short term.The city has ordered about 330,000 doses that have either arrived or will be coming in the next few days, Health Commissioner Dave Chokshi said. De Blasio also addressed the city worker vaccine mandate, saying firehouses are all open and response times are normal. On Thursday morning, four units were out of service, fewer than the amount the fire department typically sees, Commissioner Daniel Nigro said.Latvia rules on vaccine hesitancy The Latvian Parliament backed law amendments on Thursday that enable employers to dismiss employees if they refuse to get inoculated against Covid-19. If an employee fails to get a required Covid-19 shot in three months after suspension from work, an employer will have the right to terminate a contract immediately and to offer the employee one month’s severance payPoland reports surge in infectionsPoland reported more than 15,000 cases, a 59% rise compared to last week. The number of hospitalised people rose by 39% in a week, with the most serious situation in lower-vaccinated eastern regions as well as Warsaw, where hospitals are becoming crammed. The government will discuss whether to impose any new restrictions on Friday.EU panel weighs Astra booster AstraZeneca is submitting a data package to the European Medicines Agency today that could support the use of its Covid-19 vaccine as a booster shot, according to Marco Cavaleri, the head of biological health threats and vaccines strategy. The EMA will discuss with the company whether the data are sufficient or more evidence is needed to conclude whether it can be approved as a booster.US vaccine deadline issued for workers The Occupational Safety and Health Administration issued a federal rule mandating Covid-19 vaccinations or at least weekly testing for workers at US companies with 100 or more employees.The first compliance deadline for employers – providing time off for workers to get inoculated and ensuring those who aren’t vaccinated are wearing masks – is December 5. Workers must be fully vaccinated by January 4 or submit to testing. Europe is Covid epicentre The World Health Organization warned that a surge of coronavirus cases in Europe and Central Asia pushed the region back as the epicentre of the pandemic.There are now 78 million cases in the European region, which is more than infections reported in Southeast Asia, the Eastern Mediterranean, the Western Pacific and Africa combined. Last week, Europe and Central Asia accounted for almost half of the world’s reported deaths from Covid-19. Moderna lowers vaccine sales forecast  Moderna shares slid after the company lowered its forecast for 2021 Covid-19 vaccine sales. Moderna now sees sales of $15-billion to $18-billion, down from $20-billion expected earlier this year. Merck’s Covid pill wins UK approval Britain’s regulator became the first in the world to approve Merck’s Covid-19 antiviral pill, describing the treatment as safe and effective following a swift review.The drug, molnupiravir, was authorised for use in people with mild to moderate Covid and at least one risk factor for developing severe illness, the UK’s Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency said on Thursday. DM– With assistance from Iain Rogers, Corinne Gretler, Konrad Krasuski, Keshia Clukey, Elaine Chen, Sotiris Nikas, Janice Kew and Greg Chang."Information pertaining to Covid-19, vaccines, how to control the spread of the virus and potential treatments is ever-changing. Under the South African Disaster Management Act Regulation 11(5)(c) it is prohibited to publish information through any medium with the intention to deceive people on government measures to address COVID-19. We are therefore disabling the comment section on this article in order to protect both the commenting member and ourselves from potential liability. Should you have additional information that you think we should know, please email [email protected]"Daily Maverick © All rights reservedThere are many great benefits to being a Maverick Insider. Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them - we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster. Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.Select which newsletters you'd like to receiveSaturday, 04 December18 NovAfter a two-year hiatus due to Covid-19, President Cyril Ramaphosa on Thursday finally conferred National Orders to 26 distinguished South Africans and four eminent foreign nationals who have contributed towards the advancement of the country’s democracy and made a significant impact in improving South African’s lives.Making his keynote address, Ramaphosa said: "Two years have passed since we last held a presentation of the national orders due to Covid-19."This pandemic has devastated livelihoods and it has disrupted almost every part of our lives. While we acknowledged that the pandemic is still very much a part of us we also recognise the important duty that we have as a nation to honour those among us who have made outstanding contributions towards the betterment of our country as well as the human condition," said Ramaphosa.The first recipient of the Order of Mendi in gold for bravery is Gcinisizwe Khwezi Sylvester Kondile (posthumously) for his ultimate sacrifice to the liberation of South Africa.Mr Bantu Ncuka receives the award on his behalf #2021NationalOrdersAwards pic.twitter.com/8v1cALeOnlHe went on to confer the Order of Ikhamanga to gospel star Rebecca Malope in recognition of her decades-long work in the fields of arts, culture and music. Legendary musician and founding member of Ladysmith Black Mambazo, Dr Bhekizizwe Joseph Shabalala, who died in 2020 received his posthumously.At the opulent event held at the Sefako Makgatho Presidential Guest House in Tshwane, Ramaphosa also bestowed the Orders of Mendi for Bravery in Gold, posthumously, to Gcinisizwe Khwezi Kondile and Reverend Isaac William Wauchope.President @CyrilRamaphosa bestows National Orders 18/11/2021 #NationalOrders2021 pic.twitter.com/yYYNqwxd8fKondile received the award for his ultimate sacrifice to the liberation of South Africa, while Wauchope received the awards for lifting morale through poignant words and support in the darkest hour for soldiers who died in the sinking of the SS Mendi.The Order of Mendi for Bravery in Silver was awarded to Chad Basson who took a bullet when he shielded a stranger during a gang shootout. It was awarded posthumously as Basson lost his life during his act of bravery. READ | The heroes you don’t know - 2 men who lost their lives savings others awarded National OrdersRoydon Olckers, who was crushed to death while saving pupils at Hoërskool Driehoek also received the Order of Mendi posthumously.Ramaphosa said the national orders recognised many outstanding individuals who, in many ways, defied the odds and made immense sacrifices for us to attain our freedom, and ensure that such freedom became meaningful and was enjoyed by all.President @CyrilRamaphosa bestows National Orders 18/11/2021 #NationalOrders2021 pic.twitter.com/oZ7gEuWPvX"These are the people who use their tremendous talent not only to entertain, provoke and inspire, but also to strive for a better, more just and human society. They are men and women who confront oppression and exploitation whenever they manifest."The Order in IKHAMANGA recognizes Ms Malope for her distinguished contribution to South African music; her unique voice brings joy and comfort to many through meaningful gospel music. pic.twitter.com/SdzJ1vhAYrMeanwhile, retired Constitutional Court justice Edwin Cameron received the Order of the Baobab in Gold for his contribution to the judicial system and his tireless campaign against the stigma of HIV and Aids and for the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex and asexual (LGBTQIA+) communities.Gospel star Rebecca Malope received the Order of Ikhamanga, which recognises South African citizens who have excelled in the fields of arts culture, literature, music, journalism and sport.4h agoLife - Daily
                    Take a breather in your busy day with this curated collection of relaxing reads, real-life stories, interviews, everyday tips, and expert insights.
                10h ago27 Nov25 Jun22 Nov13 Nov06 Nov30 Nov26 Nov25 Nov11 Nov 2019Contact the public editor with feedback for our journalists, complaints, queries or suggestions about articles on News24.BusinessTechMedical scheme Discovery Health has shared the latest data from its actuarial team’s ongoing analysis of the trajectory of the Covid-19 pandemic and the real-world effectiveness of vaccines.The group noted that Covid-19 vaccine hesitancy is a key deterrent to vaccine uptake in the county and is fuelled in large part by misinformation, which drives confusion and fear.South Africa has procured sufficient Covid-19 vaccine doses for around 80% of the population. The National Department of Health has subsequently set targets to vaccinate 70% of the adult population by December 2021.Based on current vaccinated population levels and projections, it is unlikely that South Africa will meet these targets, and will most likely finish the year with slightly more than 50% of the adult population vaccinated, said Discovery.“The demand for vaccination has unfortunately slowed,” said chief executive of Discovery Health, Dr Ryan Noach.“People want to understand the true, real-world nature of the protective effects of Covid-19 vaccines. Also, people want to know their risk of experiencing side effects post-vaccination – and whether they are at higher risk of an adverse event post-vaccination or complications from Covid-19. Our analysis answers these questions.”Positive results While the high level of hesitancy will impact South Africa’s targets, Discovery said that its results showing the efficacy of the vaccines are incredibly promising.Discovery’s results show that the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine reduced the risk of being hospitalised or dying from Covid-19 in South Africa by more than 90%.“We determined the Pfizer vaccine’s effectiveness in protecting against Covid-19 admission and mortality by analysing 526,516 pathology test results, 14,673 Covid-19 admissions and 3,441 Covid‑19 deaths. All of these occurred between 17 May 2021 (the start of South Africa’s mass vaccination campaign) and 23 September 2021.”“The findings are striking and extremely encouraging. We have shown that following each dose of the two-dose Pfizer vaccine, there is significant protection against both serious Covid-19 illness relative risk of admission to hospital) and death – of course, most notable for those who are fully vaccinated, 14 days after receiving the second dose.”The key findings show:Read: How the prolonged lockdown has changed house prices in South AfricaComments section policy:Saturday, 04 December09 NovThe national health department, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (Sahpra), and organisations against administering the Covid-19 vaccine in children are headed to court this week.  Caring Healthcare Workers Coalition (CHC), the African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP), Free the Children - Save the Nation, and the Covid Care Alliance are demanding a halt to vaccinating children against the virus. They launched an urgent court application in the Pretoria High Court that will be heard on Wednesday.  Currently, Sahpra has approved Pfizer to be used in vaccinating children aged 12 to 17 against Covid-19. Children get only one dose of the vaccine, while adults get two doses. So far, 210 149 children have been vaccinated. READ | ACDP wants to stop Covid-19 vaccinations for childrenIn court papers, ACDP leader the Reverend Kenneth Meshoe states that Covid-19 is a, "... general practitioner's disease and can be successfully handled when early treatments are applied".He further says vaccinating minors, "... does not accord with the constitutional rights of the children".The religious political party wants the government to suspend the vaccinations until an appeal they lodged with Sahpra is heard and concluded. On 8 October,  Free the Children launched an appeal after Sahpra announced the approval of emergency use of Pfizer in minors. In their appeal, the organisation says the vaccines are not in the best interest of the children. The health department confirmed it is defending the case. Speaking to News24 on Monday, Dr Naseeba Kathrada from the CHC said there was not enough research to indicate that children should be vaccinated.  She said they was no need to vaccinate anyone under the age of 20.  She said another point of contention was that children could get vaccinated without their parents' consent. "Things must be done ethically. This is just exposing children to side effects." Kathrada, who earlier this year fought for the right of patients to use ivermectin, said if the department had research to prove that vaccinating children was beneficial, they could have produced it. She said the organisation was also worried that schools might make it mandatory for pupils to be vaccinated. In his affidavit as part of the case, a US-based medical doctor Peter McCullough states that the vaccines are not safe for use, "... and cannot be deployed indiscriminately or supported, recommended, or mandated to any group". READ | Here’s how the Covid-19 vaccine was tested for efficacy and safety on childrenWhile the Children's Act states that children aged 12 and older can consent to their own medical treatment, it is recommended that parents discuss the benefits of the vaccine with children and accompany them when they present themselves at vaccination sites, Health Minister Joe Phaahla said recently."Vaccination of young people from the age of 12 years is a global phenomenon, [and] the parents should not be too concerned about it," said Phaahla.Health24 reported children would only receive one dose of the Pfizer vaccine, after international reports suggested a very rare risk of myocarditis after the second jab.This side effect has mostly been seen in male teens and young adults, and the majority of cases were mild and short-lived.But scientists are in agreement that the benefits of vaccinating teens far outweigh the risks, as studies have shown Pfizer's jab is safe to use in teens and provides very high levels of protection against developing symptomatic Covid and also against Covid-related hospitalisation, Bhekisisa reported.4h agoLife - Daily
                    Take a breather in your busy day with this curated collection of relaxing reads, real-life stories, interviews, everyday tips, and expert insights.
                10h ago27 Nov25 Jun22 Nov13 Nov06 Nov30 Nov26 Nov25 Nov11 Nov 2019Contact the public editor with feedback for our journalists, complaints, queries or suggestions about articles on News24.BusinessTechSouth Africa’s unemployment rate reached a record high in Q3 2021 on the back of continued lockdown restrictions, load shedding and the July riots impacted jobs in the country.The latest Quarterly Labour Force Survey (QFLS), published by Statistics South Africa on Tuesday (30 November), shows that the official unemployment rate increased by half a percentage point from 34.4% in the second quarter of 2021 to 34.9% in the third quarter of 2021. This is the highest unemployment rate since the start of the QLFS in 2008.The data shows that the number of employed persons decreased in all provinces except the Northern Cape between Q2 2021 and Q3 2021.The largest employment decreases were recorded in Gauteng (-200,000 jobs), the North West (-128,000 jobs) and KwaZulu-Natal (-123,000).The updated unemployment data shows that there are now three provinces in South Africa with an expanded unemployment rate of more than 50%:The job losses were in part due to stricter lockdown measures to curb the spread of a third wave of Covid-19 infections, a security breach at the state-owned port operator that hobbled trade and deadly riots in KwaZulu-Natal and the commercial hub of Gauteng – the two biggest provinces by contribution to gross domestic product, Bloomberg reported.The July riots saw thousands of businesses ransacked and shuttered and cost the country about R50 billion in lost output, according to the South African Property Owners Association. They also probably contributed to an economic contraction in the third quarter that’s being forecast by the Finance Ministry and central bank.A three-week steel and engineering industry strike, the resumption of rolling blackouts and the emergence of a new coronavirus variant that prompted several nations to ban travel to and from the country right before its summer holiday season, are set to crimp growth in the fourth quarter.That would further derail South Africa’s recovery from its worst contraction in almost three decades and lead to more job losses in the final quarter.Increased unemployment could put pressure on authorities to extend relief measures that would complicate efforts to restrain public spending and meet its fiscal targets.It could also see the state expanding its job initiatives. The nation set aside R11 billion in its 2021 budget to support the creation of more than 440,000 short-term jobs until March.With further reporting by Bloomberg.Read: South Africa jobs bloodbath – unemployment rate hits new recordComments section policy:This website is using a security service to protect itself from online attacks.
Cloudflare Ray ID: 6b868de29de25cff
•
Your IP: 105.163.0.98
•
Performance & security by Cloudflare

                                            The industry is fearing a return of COVID-19 restrictions during its peak trading period.
                                        JOHANNESBURG - The restaurant sector is joining government’s effort to fast-track coronavirus vaccinations ahead of the festive season.The Restaurant Association of South Africa (Rasa)'s Wendy Alberts said that the organisation, together with South African Breweries, would be holding a vaccination drive in Johannesburg from Monday until Wednesday."The drive will be hosted in Sandton from Monday to Wednesday. The activation will be held at the brand new, beautiful Lucas Restaurant site at 24 Central. This is also an opportunity to meet and greet fellow restauranteurs and have discussions over the biggest contributors and challenges that face our industry and to understand the effects that have happened to the industry."At least 200 restaurants have been invited to bring along their employees to get their jabs.The industry is fearing a return of COVID-19 restrictions during its peak trading period.Alberts has reiterated that if this is the case, then the sector will be destroyed.





Around 35,000 people took to the streets in Brussels on Sunday to protest against restrictions imposed by the government in the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic, police said.There were some confrontations between demonstrators and police, with protesters throwing smoke bombs and fireworks, the newspaper Le Soir reported.The situation normalized later, police said.Belgium had tightened its coronavirus restrictions on Wednesday, mandating wider use of masks and enforcing work from home, as cases rose in the country's fourth Covid-19 wave. Reuters Russian President Vladimir Putin has been revaccinated against Covid-19, Russian news agencies quoted him as saying on Sunday.Putin said in June 2021 that he had been vaccinated with Sputnik V vaccine."Today, on your recommendation and that of your colleagues, I got another vaccination, Sputnik Light. This is called revaccination," Putin said at a meeting with the deputy director of the Gamaleya Research Centre for Epidemiology and Microbiology, which developed both vaccines.ReutersFour more Bayern Munich players have gone into quarantine after coming into contact with a Covid-19 infected person, the German champions said on Sunday.The Bavarians, who suffered a 2-1 shock loss to Augsburg on Friday and play Dynamo Kyiv in the Champions League next week, will be without Serge Gnabry, Jamal Musiala, Eric-Maxim Choupo-Moting and Michael Cuisance."They have gone into quarantine following agreement with local health authorities," the club said in a statement. "They had contact with a person in the immediate proximity to the team who tested positive for coronavirus."Bayern were without defender Niklas Suele until a few days ago after he tested positive, while fellow defender Josip Stanisic and a staff member went into quarantine earlier this week.Midfielder Joshua Kimmich is also in isolation for the second straight week following contact with an infected person. Kimmich has publicly refused to get vaccinated, saying he has concerns over the potential long-term effects.ReutersBritain called on Sunday for international action on the issue of medical devices such as oximeters that work better on people with lighter skin, saying the disparities may have cost lives of ethnic minority patients during the Covid-19 pandemic.Health Secretary Sajid Javid said he had commissioned a review of the issue after learning that oximeters, which measure blood oxygen levels and are key to assessing Covid-19 patients, give less accurate readings for patients with darker skin."This is systemic across the world. This is about a racial bias in some medical instruments. It's unintentional but it exists and oximeters are a really good example of that," Javid said during an interview with the BBC.Asked whether people may have died of Covid-19 as a result of the flaw, Javid said: "I think possibly yes. I don't have the full facts."He said the reason for the discrepancies was that a lot of medical devices, drugs, procedures and textbooks were put together in white majority countries."I want to make sure that we do something about it but not just in the UK. This is an international issue so I'm going to work with my counterparts across the world to change this," said Javid.He said he had already spoken about the issue to his U.S. counterpart, who was as interested in it as he was. Javid said he had become aware of the problem after looking into why, in Britain, people from black and other minority ethnic backgrounds had been disproportionately affected by Covid-19.He said that at the height of the early stages of the pandemic, a third of admissions for Covid -19 into intensive care units were for ethnic minority patients, which was double their representation in the general population.ReutersA child under ten with pre-existing medical conditions has become the youngest person in Australia to die from Covid-19.Three people were being treated in hospital in Rotterdam on Saturday after they were seriously injured when Dutch police fired shots during a violent protest against Covid-19 measures, authorities said.Crowds of several hundred rioters torched cars, set off fireworks and threw rocks at police during the protests on Friday evening. Police responded with warning shots and water canons.Rotterdam police posted on Twitter on Saturday that 51 people had been arrested, half of whom were under 18."Three rioters were wounded when they were hit by bullets, they remain in hospital," police added, in an update after earlier reporting two wounded.Authorities are investigating the shootings including whether the wounded people where hit by police bullets, they added.The city's mayor, Ahmed Aboutaleb, said the protest had turned into "an orgy of violence.""Police were forced to draw their weapons and even fire direct shots," he told a news conference early on Saturday.Dutch Justice Minister Ferd Grapperhaus said in a statement the "extreme violence" against police and firefighters in Rotterdam was "repulsive.""The right to protest is very important in our society but what we saw last night was simply criminal behaviour," Grapperhaus said.Protesters had gathered to voice opposition to government plans to restrict access to indoor venues to people who have a "corona pass," showing they have been vaccinated or have already recovered from an infection.The pass is also available to people who have not been vaccinated, but have proof of a negative test.In several towns in the Netherlands on Saturday evening there were small pockets of unrest as youths clashed with police.In The Hague, riot police used water canons to clear part of the central Schilderswijk area after rioters threw fireworks at police and damaged traffic lights, local police said on Twitter.There was a heavy police presence in several other major towns after social media calls to riot followed the Rotterdam clashes, but any further violence was largely contained, with only a handful of arrests, Dutch media reported.Organisers of a protest that had been planned in Amsterdam on Saturday against the coronavirus measures said they had canceled the event after Friday's violence.Even so, several thousand protesters showed up for a march around the city's central Dam square. The march remained peaceful, monitored by a heavy police presence.The Netherlands reimposed some lockdown measures last weekend for an initial three weeks in an effort to slow a resurgence of coronavirus contagion, but daily infections have remained at their highest levels since the start of the pandemic.ReutersDisney World near Orlando, Florida, operated by Walt Disney Co, has put its Covid-19 vaccination mandate on hold, a spokesperson said on Saturday.The move comes amid the Biden administration's workplace Covid-19 vaccine rule, which requires businesses with at least 100 employees to require staff get vaccinated against Covid-19 or be tested weekly and wear a face covering at work.Local TV station Fox 35 was first to report the news, citing a cast member at the resort complex.A Disney spokesperson had earlier told Reuters by email: "We believe that our approach to mandatory vaccines has been the right one as we have continued to focus on the safety and well-being of our Cast Members and Guests.""At this point, more than 90% of active Florida-based Cast Members have already verified that they are fully vaccinated," the spokesperson added.Executives of Walt Disney Co, along with United Parcel Service Inc and others, met with White House officials last month to discuss President Joe Biden's Covid-19 vaccine requirement plan for private-sector workers, amid concerns it could worsen labor shortages and supply-chain woes.In addition, vaccine mandates are deeply controversial in the United States. Supporters say they are helping to end the nearly two-year coronavirus pandemic, while opponents argue they violate the US Constitution and curb individual liberty.Biden imposed the requirement in September, telling Americans that "our patience is wearing thin" with those refusing to get inoculated.Walt Disney Co had made vaccination mandatory on July 30 for all its on-site salaried and non-union hourly employees in the United States, as the highly infectious Delta Covid-19 variant drove a resurgence in cases then. Reuters Ollie, a 6-year-old goldendoodle therapy dog, is helping kids at Rady Children's Hospital-San Diego to overcome the anxiety associated with getting a Covid-19 vaccine. A sandy white beach, sparkling ocean and blue sky have become the “office” for Johannesburg entrepreneur Sandhya Singh.The idyllic Mozambique beach resort of Macaneta is where Singh is on “workcation” — a popular trend that combines business and vacation for those who want to work while escaping Covid fatigue.Singh has taken four trips in the past year to beat the humdrum of working from home.South African hospitality and travel experts are seeing an uptick in demand for workcations both by locals and foreigners who want to work and play at SA destinations.An EY survey of more than 16,000 workers from 16 countries found that more than half would consider leaving their job post pandemic if they are not afforded some form of flexibility in where and when they work.Before the Covid-19 pandemic, SA was mired with low growth, structural unemployment, and high inequality. Weaknesses in electricity and transport infrastructure, a scarcity of skilled workers, constrained fiscal space, poor institutional governance, and consequent low confidence, reduced the country’s growth potential and ability to achieve its development goals. The pandemic worsened already muted economic prospects. Lockdowns and other restrictions were necessary but blunt health responses to limit the spread of the virus in the absence of other pharmaceutical interventions at the time.The US Transportation Security Administration screened 2.24 million airline passengers on Friday, the highest number since the start of the pandemic. Gauteng is starting to show the first signs that a fourth wave of the Covid-19 pandemic is approaching. With the festive season ahead, unvaccinated South Africans could put its hospitals under pressure again, like they were last December.University of KwaZulu-Natal geneticist professor Tulio de Oliveira said on Friday: “At present, there are early warning signs from the laboratory data that a fourth wave may be starting in Gauteng.“The epidemic may be showing the first signs of growing” since the third wave dropped off, he said, flagging an increase in the positivity rate and the reproductive number.#COVID19 UPDATE: A total of 31,768 tests were conducted in the last 24hrs, with 887 new cases, which represents a 2.8% positivity rate. A further 10 #COVID19 related deaths have been reported, bringing total fatalities to 89,572 to date. See more here: https://t.co/Y5vbviWXgx pic.twitter.com/EiOBR6Zh7wWould you like to comment on this article or view other readers' comments? Register (it’s quick and free) or sign in now.Please read our Comment Policy before commenting. Read more at the SA government's  online coronavirus portal  or use the 24-hour public hotline: 0800 029 999 Saturday, 04 December11 NovLow vaccination rates are dampening South Africa's fiscal outlook, Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana warned on Thursday, saying the implications of a fourth wave of the Covid-19 pandemic remained uncertain and necessitated a conservative approach. Treasury has upwardly revised the GDP growth rate from 3.3% to 5.1%, and says output levels will return to pre-pandemic levels by 2022. Growth has been helped by less stringent Covid-19 restrictions, lower interest rates and higher commodity prices.But the pace of recovery is unlikely to be sustained over the next three years, and Godongwana warned that vaccine rollout was a critical factor. "The strength of South Africa's economic recovery will also depend on the rollout of vaccines," Godongwana told members of Parliament.South Africa recently saw its lowest Covid-19 positivity rate since the start of the pandemic. Most people aged 50 and older have also had at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. But government has expressed concern over lingering vaccine hesitancy, and analysts have warned that a fourth wave is likely to strike over the festive season in December and January.Tightening beltsBriefing reporters ahead of the medium-term budget policy statement in Parliament on Thursday, the minister argued for staying the course of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms, after government was forced to reprioritise spending last year. Flanked by South African Revenue Service Commissioner Edward Kieswetter, deputy finance minister David Masondo and National Treasury director general Dondo Mogajane, Godongwana put aside his black feathered hat aside and told reporters South Africa was not out of the woods.READ | National Treasury policy document warns new coal value may mostly be 'short term'He noted that a fourth Covid-19 wave would present yet another fiscal disruption to National Treasury, made harder by an underperforming, debt-laden economy."We don't know the implications of a fourth wave on expenditure. It is far too soon to tell. However, the low vaccination rates are a problem. The unrest which we saw in July also impacted both our growth and our expenditure," said Godongwana.Godongwana said the medium-term budget policy statement had been conservative in its growth projections because government "did not anticipate a miracle" to improve the economy's growth prospects.He added that in this climate, there was little wiggle room - including for funding of troubled state-owned entities outside of their existing debt commitments."We want to practice tough love. We have not made provisions for now. Whether we will make provisions in February, I doubt. Access to funds without performance being taken into consideration does not work."Our position is that there is no incentive for hard work, efficiency or value for money and that is exactly what we are demanding," Godongwana said.READ | Don't worry about resignations, says Treasury's Mogajane amid concerns over succession planningGodongwana further said there would be ongoing engagements with unions in the public service about wages. On the extension of new support grants beyond March next year, Godongwana said the introduction of a basic income grant would come through sacrificing spending on other items in the medium-term expenditure framework.He enjoyed significant support from his colleagues and fellow minister in Cabinet, Godongwana added."I do believe my colleagues support our structural reforms. Some of these matters are not in their control, by the way," Godongwana said.Get the biggest business stories emailed to you every weekday.Go to the Fin24 front page. 
Low vaccination rates are dampening South Africa's fiscal outlook, Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana warned on Thursday, saying the implications of a fourth wave of the Covid-19 pandemic remained uncertain and necessitated a conservative approach. Treasury has upwardly revised the GDP growth rate from 3.3% to 5.1%, and says output levels will return to pre-pandemic levels by 2022. Growth has been helped by less stringent Covid-19 restrictions, lower interest rates and higher commodity prices.But the pace of recovery is unlikely to be sustained over the next three years, and Godongwana warned that vaccine rollout was a critical factor. "The strength of South Africa's economic recovery will also depend on the rollout of vaccines," Godongwana told members of Parliament.South Africa recently saw its lowest Covid-19 positivity rate since the start of the pandemic. Most people aged 50 and older have also had at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. But government has expressed concern over lingering vaccine hesitancy, and analysts have warned that a fourth wave is likely to strike over the festive season in December and January.Tightening beltsBriefing reporters ahead of the medium-term budget policy statement in Parliament on Thursday, the minister argued for staying the course of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms, after government was forced to reprioritise spending last year. Flanked by South African Revenue Service Commissioner Edward Kieswetter, deputy finance minister David Masondo and National Treasury director general Dondo Mogajane, Godongwana put aside his black feathered hat aside and told reporters South Africa was not out of the woods.He noted that a fourth Covid-19 wave would present yet another fiscal disruption to National Treasury, made harder by an underperforming, debt-laden economy."We don't know the implications of a fourth wave on expenditure. It is far too soon to tell. However, the low vaccination rates are a problem. The unrest which we saw in July also impacted both our growth and our expenditure," said Godongwana.Godongwana said the medium-term budget policy statement had been conservative in its growth projections because government "did not anticipate a miracle" to improve the economy's growth prospects.He added that in this climate, there was little wiggle room - including for funding of troubled state-owned entities outside of their existing debt commitments."We want to practice tough love. We have not made provisions for now. Whether we will make provisions in February, I doubt. Access to funds without performance being taken into consideration does not work."Our position is that there is no incentive for hard work, efficiency or value for money and that is exactly what we are demanding," Godongwana said.Godongwana further said there would be ongoing engagements with unions in the public service about wages. On the extension of new support grants beyond March next year, Godongwana said the introduction of a basic income grant would come through sacrificing spending on other items in the medium-term expenditure framework.He enjoyed significant support from his colleagues and fellow minister in Cabinet, Godongwana added."I do believe my colleagues support our structural reforms. Some of these matters are not in their control, by the way," Godongwana said.Get the biggest business stories emailed to you every weekday.Go to the Fin24 front page. 4h agoBusiness Briefing - weekly
                    A deep dive into the big business story of the week, as well as expert analysis of markets and trends, curated by Fin24 editor Helena Wasserman.
                22 Jul 20208h ago02 Dec29 NovBusinessTechCooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has extended South Africa’s national state of disaster by a further month.The state of disaster is now set to expire on 15 December 2021. This would make it the 21st month under the state of disaster since it was declared at the end of March 2020, and the 18th extension of the regulations after their first end fate of June 2020.In a government gazette published over the weekend, the minister said that the extension considers the need to augment the existing legislation and contingency arrangements undertaken by the organs of state to address the impact of the disaster.While the national state of disaster was initially set to lapse on 15 June 2020, the act provides that it can be extended by the Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs minister by notice in the gazette for one month at a time before it lapses.The government has relied on the regulations to introduce and give effect to lockdown restrictions, which it has used to curb the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic.However, it has also faced criticism for giving national government wide-ranging powers over the lives of citizens, with few limits and little to no oversight from parliament.The latest extension means that South Africa will be nearing 29 months of restrictions, with the prospect of a state of disaster continuing into the new year.Health officials have raised concerns that South Africa could be hit with a fourth wave of Covid-19 infections in late December/early January. The government will rely on the ongoing state of disaster to reintroduce lockdown restrictions at short notice if need be.However, South Africa’s strict measures to reduce the spread of the coronavirus could limit the severity of the pandemic’s next wave, says Nicholas Crisp, the deputy director-general of South Africa’s Department of Health.“If we continue with social distancing, we will still get a fourth wave, but it will be mild. It could be a quarter of the first wave – minimal. People will get infected and get sick and have a lousy Christmas, but deaths and hospitalizations will be lower,” he told Bloomberg.Still, the abandoning of precautionary measures or the emergence of a new variant could change the outlook, Crisp said. “We are preparing for the worst.”On Sunday (14 November), South Africa reported 262 new cases of Covid-19, taking the total reported to 2,925,939.Deaths have reached 89,484 (+8), while recoveries have climbed to 2,819,688, leaving the country with a balance of 16,767 active cases. The total number of vaccines administered is 23,950,956 (+39,479).Read: South Africa is facing a ‘talent tsunami’, experts warnComments section policy:While more than 100 states support the proposal, powerful ones such as Canada, Germany, Japan, Norway, Switzerland and the UK, as well as the European Union, still do not, and may continue to prevent its adoption by consensus.On 18 January 2021, the director-general of the World Health Organization (WHO) warned that the world was on the brink of a "catastrophic moral failure" if wealthier nations did not ensure the equitable distribution of vaccines to combat the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.Yet, more than 10 months later, not much has changed. The iniquitous global maldistribution of Covid-19 vaccines persists and is now widely acknowledged as constituting "vaccine apartheid".Without universal equitable access to vaccines, everyone in the world remains vulnerable to the ravages of SARS-CoV-2. However, as with most calamities, due to existing inequalities and systems of disadvantage, Covid-19 has particularly severe consequences in the Global South and specifically for women of colour living in poverty, as well as the elderly, and people with disabilities and other vulnerabilities.The TRIPS Covid-19 waiver proposalAttempting to mitigate against vaccine apartheid and its devastating impacts, on 2 October 2020, India and South Africa proposed to the World Trade Organization (WTO) a temporary waiver from...Read the full story on Daily Maverick.AllAfrica publishes around 700 reports a day from more than 100 news organizations and over 500 other institutions and individuals, representing a diversity of positions on every topic. We publish news and views ranging from vigorous opponents of governments to government publications and spokespersons. Publishers named above each report are responsible for their own content, which AllAfrica does not have the legal right to edit or correct.Articles and commentaries that identify allAfrica.com as the publisher are produced or commissioned by AllAfrica. To address comments or complaints, please Contact us.
          AllAfrica is a voice of, by and about Africa - aggregating, producing and distributing 700 news and information items daily from over 100 African news organizations and our own reporters to an African and global public. We operate from Cape Town, Dakar, Abuja, Johannesburg, Nairobi and Washington DC.
        Get the latest in African news delivered straight to your inboxBy submitting above, you agree to our privacy policy.Almost finished...We need to confirm your email address.To complete the process, please follow the instructions in the email we just sent you.There was a problem processing your submission. Please try again later.
                                            The NICD said that there'd been a high number of cases since the start of the month - these include the influenza-like illness and pneumonia hospitalised cases at surveillance sentinel sites.
                                        CAPE TOWN - The National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) said that there'd been a sharp increase in influenza cases over the past few weeks in South Africa. The NICD said that there'd been a high number of cases since the start of the month - these include the influenza-like illness and pneumonia hospitalised cases at surveillance sentinel sites.It added that there'd been reports of clusters of influenza cases in schools and workplaces.The NICD's Cheryl Cohen: "The increase in influenza this summer, which is not the typical time for the influenza season in South Africa, is likely the result of the relaxation of non-pharmaceutical interventions to control COVID-19 combined with other factors such as reduced immunity because flu has not circulated since 2020 and 2021." She stressed that the influenza vaccine remained the primary means for preventing seasonal influenza infection and should ideally be administered before the influenza season from March to April."To prevent the spread of influenza, stay home when you are sick, cover your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing, clean your hands regularly and clean and disinfect common places."





Turkey is the latest country to remove mandatory quarantine requirements
for fully vaccinated South African travellers. Travellers from South Africa have been severely restricted
from entering Turkey throughout the Covid-19 pandemic. Along with Brazil,
Nepal, and Sri Lanka, a direct flight ban imposed on South Africa has made
entry into Turkey near impossible.For those travellers who had been in South Africa in the
last 14 days, a mandatory quarantine protocol was enforced. These arriving
passengers, even with a negative PCR test result, have been required to spend
two weeks in a designated hotel at their own expense.These restrictive travel requirements changed on Monday.
Travellers from South Africa still need to submit a negative PCR test taken
within 72 hours of arrival in Turkey but will be exempt from any quarantine if
they can provide proof of vaccination.Quarantine regulations for passengers coming to Turkey from South Africa have been amended and fully vaccinated passengers will be exempt from quarantine. pic.twitter.com/w35dHyyhOeTravellers are considered fully vaccinated 14 days after receiving
their final dose of a vaccine approved by World Health Organisation (WHO). This
applies to the last dose of the two-dose Pfizer vaccine and the single dose Johnson
& Johnson (J&J) jab.Passengers between the ages of 12 and 18, who are not
vaccinated, will need to be tested for Covid-19. If the test is negative, they
can proceed with their travels in Turkey. If the test is positive, they will be
required to quarantine. Adult travellers who can’t provide official vaccination documents
must enter quarantine for 14 days at their place of residence or an address that
they declare in Turkey. Unvaccinated travellers can terminate their time in
quarantine by submitting to another PCR test on the tenth day of their stay,
provided that the result is negative.All travellers arriving in Turkey also need to submit a Passenger
Locator Form, which requires the passenger’s personal information and passport
details.Turkish Airlines confirmed the latest regulations which came
into effect on Monday with Business Insider South Africa, adding that flights
from Cape Town and Johannesburg were operational. Return flights from Johannesburg to Istanbul start from
around $598 (R9,000) and $481 (R7,300) from Cape Town. (Compiled by Luke Daniel)Get the best of our site delivered to your inbox every day.The United States (US) reopened to fully vaccinated South
African travellers on Monday, with specific rules on pre-flight testing and exemptions
for children. Travel between South Africa and the US has been limited
throughout the pandemic. An outright ban was imposed on travellers from South
Africa at the start of 2021, with the Centres for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) citing the Beta variant, first detected in the Eastern Cape, as
the main cause for concern.South Africa wasn’t alone on the US’ travel ban list.
Travellers from the European Union, Britain and China, India, and Brazil were also
restricted, save for some very specific exemptions under the US’ National
Interest Exception (NIE) programme.A new Presidential Proclamation issued at the end of October
scrapped country-based restrictions and, instead, put the emphasis on
vaccination. The order came into effect on Monday, allowing fully vaccinated
travellers, regardless of their departure point, entry into the US. Travellers are considered fully vaccinated 14 days after receiving
the last dose of their two-dose course, like the Pfizer jab, or single-dose,
like the one produced by Johnson & Johnson (J&J). Both vaccines,
currently in use in South Africa, are authorised by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA).Proof of Covid-19 vaccination will also need to be provided.
South Africa’s recently launched digital Covid-19 vaccination certificate is
accepted as a digital record issued by a “public health agency, government
agency, or other authorised vaccine provider.” Physical vaccination cards will also be accepted as proof
and must contain personal identifiers, the name of the official source issuing
the record, the vaccine manufacturer, and date of vaccination.Fully vaccinated travellers are still required to show a
negative Covid-19 viral test, like a RT-PCR, result on a sample taken no more
than 3 days before the flight’s departure.Children under 18 years of age don’t need to be fully
vaccinated to enter the US but will need to provide a negative Covid-19 test
result taken within 24-hours of departure. These children will, additionally,
be retested 3 to 5 days after arriving in the US and are required to self-quarantine
for a week. Other travellers exempt from the vaccination rule include persons
on diplomatic or official foreign government travel and those with documented
medical contraindications to receiving a Covid-19 vaccine. South Africans looking for the quickest way to the US can fly
directly from Johannesburg to Newark, New Jersey, with United Airlines. Delta
Air Lines also offers direct flights between OR Tambo International Airport and
Atlanta, with flight frequencies expected to increase in mid-December.(Compiled by Luke Daniel)Get the best of our site delivered to your inbox every day.News / South Africa
Marizka Coetzer
So far, South Africans can look forward to what promises to be a festive season as the daily Covid infections and death rate remain low.The health department’s acting director-general Nicholas Crisp said various departments, the private sector and business entities were working together to get the economy going again and to avoid further lockdown restrictions.“We are not in a hurry to introduce any further restrictions. There are no indications at the moment that this will be necessary or even valuable to implement,” said Crisp. Corporate Traveller’s general manager Oz Desai said the pandemic had caused everyone to lose out on the opportunity to enjoy life to the fullest for well over a year.“Whether that meant having to put much-anticipated adventures on hold or not being able to spend time with loved ones living far away,” Desai said.Rebound travel was primarily leisure-oriented, but also extended to business travel.ALSO READ: Another hard lockdown incoming? Experts predict Covid-19 spike“As traveller confidence continues to rise, we are seeing a huge increase in demand for corporate travel,” he added.Low-cost airline kulula.com’s chief commercial officer Desmond O’Connor announced the Cape Town and Durban service capacity had increased to pre-Covid figures. Kulula.com had relaunched its double-daily service between Cape Town and Durban after lockdown restrictions had left the airline with only one flight per day on the route.“This is a highly popular route, particularly over weekends and school holidays,” O’Connor said. Currently, kulula.com had more than 10 000 passengers booked in November and more than 3 000 for December.South African Liquor Brand owners Association chief executive Kurt Moore welcomed the department of health’s announcement that the current levels of infections dud not warrant further restrictions.“The alcohol industry and tourism are inextricably linked in terms of hospitality and the holiday experience,” Moore said.Any further alcohol bans over the crucial festive season would only deter tourists from booking trips to South Africa, undermining the government’s attempts to support the industry.He said with vaccines freely available in the country, the government should no longer need to use such heavy-handed measures, like curfews, lockdowns, and alcohol bans.Federated Hospitality Association of Southern Africa chair Rosemary Anderson said no-one knew if government would impose harsher restrictions in light of the upcoming festive season.ALSO READ: Matric Rage ‘risk for 4th wave’ this year“We just know that continued lockdowns are not sustainable and government needs to control the Covid pandemic through mass vaccination,” she said.“As other countries have already proved, mass vaccination is the only sustainable way of managing the pandemic.”It was not sustainable or financially viable in an already crippled economy to continue the practice of lockdowns and alcohol restrictions when they were now causing more harm than the pandemic.“There is no sector as aware of the direct relationship between adherence to protocols and the recovery of the sector than the hospitality and tourism industry,” Anderson said.marizkac@citizen.co.zaSOUTH AFRICAOWN YOUR LIFESOUTH AFRICAPROTESTSMOST POPULAR PAST 24 HOURS PAST WEEK 1 
Celebs And Viral  Jub Jub to Kelly Khumalo: 'Lets put our differences aside for the sake of our son' 2 
Covid-19  Sassa payment dates: When to collect the R350 SRD grant in December 3 
World  Omicron travel ban: France to remove South Africa from red list 4 
South Africa  Fikile Mbalula, the lottery boss and the luxury R5.6 million home 5 
Celebs And Viral  Rami Chuene seething after 'madam' punishes domestic worker for Oreos  1 Celebs And Viral  AKA wants to be involved in DJ Zinhle's second baby's life 2 South Africa  Fikile Mbalula, the lottery boss and the luxury R5.6 million home 3 Celebs And Viral  Rami Chuene seething after 'madam' punishes domestic worker for Oreos 4 Celebs And Viral  Jub Jub under fire for comments aimed at Kelly Khumalo 5 South Africa  Daily news update: Ramaphosa to chair NCCC meeting today, new variant named Omicron and the Summer Cup 
EDITOR'S CHOICE News  Head of NPA's Investigating Directorate Hermione Cronje resigns Premium  Another court turn in Amcu leader tussle Columns  Getting rid of the ANC is a herculean task South Africa  I did not receive R1 million from Baleka Mbete or government, says Natasha Thahane South Africa  Fikile Mbalula, the lottery boss and the luxury R5.6 million home News  Head of NPA's Investigating Directorate Hermione Cronje resignsPremium  Another court turn in Amcu leader tussleColumns  Getting rid of the ANC is a herculean taskSouth Africa  I did not receive R1 million from Baleka Mbete or government, says Natasha ThahaneSouth Africa  Fikile Mbalula, the lottery boss and the luxury R5.6 million homeSOUTH AFRICAOWN YOUR LIFESOUTH AFRICAPROTESTS 2021 The Citizen. All Rights Reserved. Privacy PolicyBusinessTechSouth Africa’s hospitality industry says the government needs to look at all the options it can before reintroducing damaging lockdown regulations.Fedhasa, the national trade association for the hospitality industry, pointed to the government’s recent decision to extend the national state of disaster to 15 December 2021 as a point of concern ahead of the busy holiday period.“As an industry, we are not insensitive to the fact that balancing lives and livelihoods is an impossible task and we understand that sacrifices have to be made. However, hotels and restaurants are not just a non-essential lifestyle activity which can be switched on and off to stem the spread of Covid,” said Rosemary Anderson, Fedhasa national chair.Unlike many other sectors, the hospitality sector has largely borne the brunt of changing lockdown regulations, despite putting in place stringent health and hygiene protocols, she said.“Thousands of livelihoods have already been lost and every day the operations of the hospitality sector and its extended supply chain are curtailed through regulations, more livelihoods hang in the balance,” said Anderson.She said Fedhasa is calling on the government to make every effort to avoid imposing additional restrictions on the sector, particularly over the festive season break when many businesses will be trying to recover from the losses over the past 19 months.“In addition to a public health campaign encouraging citizens to comply with non-pharmaceutical protocols, we would like to see a much faster rate of vaccination and a strengthened healthcare system as these really are the only way we can eliminate continuing surges, avoid Covid limiting operations and restore some semblance of normality in our lives.”On Saturday (13 November), Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma extended South Africa’s national state of disaster by a further month.The state of disaster is now set to expire on 15 December 2021. This would make it the 21st month under the state of disaster since it was declared at the end of March 2020, and the 18th extension of the regulations after their first end fate of June 2020.In a government gazette published over the weekend, the minister said that the extension considers the need to augment the existing legislation and contingency arrangements undertaken by the organs of state to address the impact of the disaster.While the national state of disaster was initially set to lapse on 15 June 2020, the act provides that it can be extended by the Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs minister by notice in the gazette for one month at a time before it lapses.Read: Legal challenge to South Africa’s never-ending lockdownComments section policy:Former chief justice Mogoeng Mogoeng has  criticised the way President Cyril Ramaphosa’s administration has handled the Covid-19 pandemic.He questioned whether the government trampled on South Africans' fundamental rights when deciding on the lockdowns and vaccines.Mogoeng was speaking at an event organised by the Forum of Institutes Supporting Democracy (FISD), which is chaired by public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane.According to Mogoeng, the government ought to have consulted, through public debates and at the National Assembly, before  limiting people’s rights through different levels of lockdowns.During the height of the Covid-19 infections, Ramaphosa, through the  advice of scientists in the national coronavirus command council and the cabinet, decided on the nature of lockdown levels on which to place the country. Mogoeng believes this was wrong and did not meet the minimum constitutional requirements.“Why have we allowed a structure that is neither constitutional nor statutory  — a command council, a minister of Cogta and the president — to interfere with our entrenched fundamental rights in this manner and to extend lockdown as easily as they do and in circumstances where more accountability would have been experienced if the National Assembly was allowed to enjoy its constitutional rights,” Mogoeng said.South Africans should be insisting on open and public debates around the pandemic, Mogoeng urged.Mogoeng  retired from his position as the chief justice last mont .Why, he asked, does the government prefer a state of disaster management when the  pandemic is clearly a state of emergency.“These are some of the pertinent good governance related questions that affect on our constitutional democracy,” he said.According to Mogoeng, there was a level of secrecy associated with the handling of the pandemic, especially on budget and expenditure.Mogoeng said  despite Ramaphosa in April last year announcing a R500bn injection into the economy as part of the extraordinary Covid-19 budget.He  told the conference that the government was not transparent on whether  there was corruption during the pandemic.This was despite the several updates the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) gave to parliament on its ongoing probe into the R12.3bn procurement of personal protective equipment.“Is there corruption being perpetrated during this epidemic? Are pointed questions being asked persistently and the necessary investigations being embarked upon by parliament, media, analysts or academia, the public or Chapter Nine institutions or other human rights driven institutions?," Mogoeng asked.“Or have we all been beaten into submission  by the fear of being routinely demonised, investigated or lied about?”“Are we all afraid of the ever ready and shameless propaganda or smear campaign machinery?”Mogoeng said there were video clips and articles questioning “fundamentals” of Covid-19 that have been “routinely” taken off media platforms.He  dived into the vaccines by asking the conference why institutions supporting democracy  allowed themselves to be “gripped by cowardice” when it came to exercising the right of freedom of expression where they differed with the administering of the vaccines.He  questioned the mooted vaccine passports, asking if they were  not in a way tantamount to forcing people to vaccinate by   denying unvaccinated people access to some spaces.TimesLIVEWould you like to comment on this article or view other readers' comments? Register (it’s quick and free) or sign in now.Please read our Comment Policy before commenting. Read more at the SA government's  online coronavirus portal  or use the 24-hour public hotline: 0800 029 999 Gauteng was the only province to record more than 50 new Covid-19 cases in the past day, latest figures from the National Institute for Communicable Diseases showed.There were 245 new infections countrywide, of which 85 were in Gauteng. There were three provinces with more than 30 infections — the Western Cape (38), KwaZulu-Natal (37) and the Free State (34).The new cases mean that there have been 2,924,317 infections recorded in SA to date.Universities granted millions to develop Covid-19 vaccineWalter Sisulu University (WSU) and North West University (NWU) have been granted R3.5m to support locally made candidate vaccines, including one for Covid-19.A memorandum of agreement between WSU and the Chemical Industries Education & Training Authority (Chieta) was signed in November to conduct preclinical trials to test the efficacy of candidate Covid-19 vaccines which have been already developed.PODCAST | Milestone moments from Covid-19: how the pandemic will affect our historyIn this episode of the Khwezi Science Report we reflect on the unforgettable moments we have experienced. We chat to renowned medical historian and anthropologist from the University of Cape Town, Dr Mandisa Mbali, about the shape of our post-pandemic society.Is it safe to swim in public pools, lakes and at beaches during the Covid-19 pandemic?With the December holidays fast approaching, many will trade the office for chilled afternoons at the beach and public swimming pools.But is it safe and what is the chance of contracting Covid-19 while swimming?According to the World Health Organization (WHO), there is no chance of contracting Covid-19 while swimming because “the Covid-19 virus does not transmit through water while swimming”.New Zealand beefed up security measures at its parliament on Tuesday as thousands of people gathered to protest against Covid-19 vaccine mandates and government lockdowns.All but two entrances to the parliament building, known as the Beehive, were closed off in the presence of unprecedented levels of police and security personnel, as mostly unmasked protesters marched through central Wellington and congregated outside parliament.While the demonstration was peaceful, many people were seen holding signs and placards with messages like "Freedom" and "Kiwis are not lab rats" and shouting slogans as they demanded the government roll back compulsory vaccination and lift restrictions."I will not be coerced and I will not be forced into taking something I don't want in my body," a protester said outside parliament."I'm asking (the government) to give us back 2018. Simple as that. I want my freedoms back."New Zealand has struggled to fight off a highly infectious outbreak of the Delta variant this year, forcing Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern to move from its strategy of elimination through lockdowns to living with the virus with higher vaccinations.Ardern last month said the country would require teachers and workers in the health and disability sectors to be fully vaccinated against COVID-19, and has promised to end restrictions only after 90% of the eligible population is inoculated.That threshold is higher than many other countries and has invited criticism from people calling for more freedoms, while the mandate will be a hurdle for those looking to get back to work but still avoiding the jab."Treat us like people!" another protester exclaimed when asked about the government's stance on mandating the vaccine."I'm here for freedom. The government, what they're doing, is anti-freedom."New Zealand still has among the lowest COVID-19 cases in the world with under 8,000 cases reported so far and 32 deaths. It reported 125 new cases on Tuesday and its total double-dose vaccination rate had reached nearly 80% of its eligible population.-Reuters Read more at the SA government's  online coronavirus portal  or use the 24-hour public hotline: 0800 029 999 Saturday, 04 December18 AugAs many as four out of five South Africans may have contracted the coronavirus, indicating that the country may be one of the world’s hardest-hit nations by the disease, the chief actuary at Discovery said. Emile Stipp based his calculations on the country’s case-fatality rate and excess deaths, a measure of the number of fatalities compared with an historical average. They are thought to provide a more accurate picture of the impact of the pandemic than the official toll.“If we know the mortality rate of Covid, we can deduce the likely infection level,” Stipp said in an emailed response to questions. The infection rate of between 70% and 80%, as estimated by Stipp, is high by global standards and could push South Africa close to so-called herd immunity, estimated at between 80% and 90% by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Still, it’s possible that the delta variant of the virus could reinfect those who contracted other strains.Deaths dataIn England only 18% of blood donors had antibodies showing prior infection, Public Health England said in an Aug. 12 report. That number jumped to 97% when those with antibodies from vaccinations were included. About 61% of England’s population is fully inoculated, compared with 7.1% in South Africa.Stipp said he based his assessment on the assumption that 90% of excess deaths reported by the South African Medical Research Council were due to Covid-19. The SAMRC estimates South Africa’s excess death number at 229,850 during the pandemic, compared with an official Covid-19 death toll of 77,993. The country’s case fatality rate is 3%.South Africa has the highest number of infections and deaths in Africa. It also has the most widespread testing and monitoring of cause of death.In a May 13 presentation to Satsa, a tourism body, Stipp estimated that 62.1% of South African had contracted the virus - a number he’s since revised. The Eastern Cape, where 91.1% of the population was thought to have been infected, was the worst-hit province, and Gauteng, at 43.4%, and North West, at 35%, the least-affected. The latter two provinces have posted record pandemic-era excess deaths in the country’s third wave of infections, which is yet to fully subside.Surveys of blood donors in January and May put South Africa’s overall prior infection rate at 42.8%.- With assistance from Naomi Kresge and Roxanne Henderson.03 DecBusiness Briefing - weekly
                    A deep dive into the big business story of the week, as well as expert analysis of markets and trends, curated by Fin24 editor Helena Wasserman.
                22 Jul 20208h ago02 Dec29 NovScientists yet to establish whether the new variant is more contagious or able to overcome immunity provided by jabs.South African scientists have detected a new coronavirus variant with multiple mutations but are yet to establish whether it is more contagious or able to overcome the immunity provided by vaccines or prior infection, the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) has said.The variant, known as C.1.2, was flagged last week by the KwaZulu-Natal Research and Innovation and Sequencing Platform in a preprint study that has yet to be peer-reviewed. NICD scientists said on Monday C.1.2 was only “present at very low levels” and that it was too early to predict how it might evolve.While the majority of South Africa’s coronavirus cases are currently caused by the Delta variant – first detected in India – C.1.2 caught scientists’ attention because its mutation is almost twice as fast as observed in other global variants.Its frequency remains relatively low, however, and it has so far been detected in less than 3 percent of genomes sequenced since it was first picked up in May – although this has increased from 0.2 percent to 2 percent last month.“At this stage, we do not have experimental data to confirm how it reacts in terms of sensitivity to antibodies,” NICD researcher Penny Moore said during a virtual press briefing.“[But] we have considerable confidence that the vaccines that are being rolled out in South Africa will continue to protect us against severe illness and death,” she added.  
 So far C.1.2 has been detected in all nine provinces of South Africa, as well as in other parts of the world including China, Mauritius, New Zealand and the United Kingdom.It is however not frequent enough to qualify as a “variant of interest” or a “variant of concern” such as the highly transmissible Delta and Beta variants, which emerged in South Africa late last year.South Africa is the continent’s hardest-hit country with more than 2.7 million COVID-19 cases reported to date, of which at least 81,830 have been fatal.The Beta variant drove a second wave of infections in December and January, and the country is now grappling with a persistent third Delta-dominated wave predicted to overlap with a looming fourth.  
 Africa CDC head says less than 3 percent of continent’s population have been vaccinated and blames vaccine inequality.UN health agency says West Africa faces complex challenge of multiple outbreaks that could strain healthcare systems.The country’s statistics authorities said they updated the way they calculate gross domestic product.Follow Al Jazeera English:Nightly curfew extended, limit on gatherings and alcohol sales as COVID-related hospital admissions also increase.South Africa has returned to tighter restrictions on public gatherings and liquor sales as the country sees a rapid rise in COVID-19 cases and hospitalisations.President Cyril Ramaphosa said on Tuesday that the new infections threaten the health systems in several parts of the country and COVID-related hospital admissions have increased 59 percent over the past two weeks.The nightly curfew has been extended by an hour from 10pm to 4am while religious gatherings indoors are limited to 50 people.The number of people allowed to gather for social events has been limited to 50 people for indoor events and 100 people for outdoor events.The retail sale of alcohol will only be permitted between 10am and 6pm local time from Monday through Thursday.South Africa’s seven-day rolling average of daily new cases has nearly doubled over the past two weeks from 6.69 new cases per 100,000 people on May 31 to 12.71 on June 14, according to Johns Hopkins University.“Our priority now is to make sure there are enough hospital beds, enough health workers, enough ventilators and enough oxygen to give the best possible care to every person who needs it,” said Ramaphosa.“The massive surge in new infections means that we must once again tighten restrictions on the movement of persons and gatherings,” he said.  
 South Africa has been the country hardest hit by the pandemic on the continent, with a cumulative total of more than 1.7 million infections, including 58,000 deaths, accounting for nearly 40 percent of Africa’s total confirmed cases.The new restrictions come as South Africa also battles to sustain a vaccination drive that has faced delays from global vaccine shortages and this week the news that it must discard two million doses of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine due to factory contamination in the United States.Johnson & Johnson had promised to deliver two million of its single-shot doses by the end of June, but that is now viewed as in jeopardy because of the recent ruling by the US Food and Drug Administration that a large amount of J&J vaccines were contaminated by a problem at a factory producing a component of the vaccine.About 480,000 of South Africa’s healthcare workers have been vaccinated with J&J doses.Doses of the Pfizer vaccine are being used to inoculate people aged 60 and over. About 1.4 million people have received their first dose of the Pfizer vaccine.According to Ramaphosa, South Africa is expecting to receive 3.1 million Pfizer doses by the end of June.South Africa is officially the worst-hit country on the continent with more than 1.65 million cases and 56,363 deaths.Decision comes after Johnson & Johnson vaccine was temporary suspended for a possible link between jab and blood clots.Follow Al Jazeera English:BusinessTechAs South Africa passes the peak of the third wave of Covid-19 in the country, health experts warn of a fourth wave on the horizon.President Cyril Ramaphosa eased lockdown restrictions this week, citing fewer Covid-19 infections, most notably in Gauteng. The president, however, cautioned that a slowing in infections does not mean the wave is over but is simply in decline. Some provinces are still experiencing rising numbers, he said.“There are areas in the country where we still need to be concerned because the rates of infection have not yet shown signs of decline.“As infections in Gauteng fall, daily new infections in the Western Cape, Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal continue to rise. There has also been a concerning rise of infections in the Northern Cape after a period of relative stability,” he said.This was echoed by the National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD) in South Africa, whose latest report shows that the country is not yet in a ‘post-wave’ period – meaning the third wave is still very much in effect.The NICD’s modelling predicts that most provinces will have peaked by early to mid-August, with the third wave bottoming out in early September. But some health experts have warned that the low numbers of infections could be short-lived – predicting that a fourth wave could start emerging as early as October.Wits University vaccinologist professor Shabir Madhi and the head of the South African National Aids Council, Dr Fareed Abdullah, both said as much in a report compiled for the Independent Electoral Commission, investigating the feasibility of holding the 2021 local elections at the end of October.The report – which has since been adopted by the IEC and used as a basis to postpone the elections – included testimony from Madhi and Abdullah warning that the country faces a resurgence of infections in October, largely due to the delayed vaccine rollout.Madhi said that for South Africa to avoid a resurgence, the population would have to reach herd immunity against the virus by September, with at least 80% of the most vulnerable population vaccinated.At the current rate of vaccination, along with widespread vaccine hesitancy among this population group, this is unlikely to be achieved.Abdullah, meanwhile, said that the waves of infection tend to peak six months apart. He said that the fourth wave, in his opinion, is likely to peak sooner rather than later, and warned that by the end of October, the country will be in the early stages of a fourth wave, with cases showing an upward trend again.This would put the country on course for a fourth-wave peak somewhere in December.Covid ChristmasSpeaking to the Sunday Times, Professor Francois Venter, the director of Ezintsha at Wits health sciences, expressed similar sentiments. According to Venter, a fourth outbreak of the coronavirus could hit South Africa around November.He said that future waves of Covid-19 in South Africa are highly dependent on the vaccine rollout – more than just the numbers, but also who is being vaccinated.Venter said that the government must pay attention to how many older people are being vaccinated. “Vaccinating one 60-year-old is more important than vaccinating two 35-year-olds,” he said.This is of particular note, given the health department’s new target of vaccinating 35 million people by Christmas, and opening up vaccines to people over 35 in August, and those older than 18 in September.Venter said that while it would be wonderful if 35 million people received a shot by the end of the year, it wouldn’t be good if many people over 50 years old were still not vaccinated. The vaccine rollout was opened to younger population groups after turnout by those over 60, and then over 50, was lower than anticipated.The Department of Health said that opening vaccines to younger population groups will not overload its system. It said that there is hope that younger populations will take the older populations with them to get vaccinated.Vaccine urgencyThe government reported an increase in people who received their Covid-19 vaccine on Monday (215,349), taking the total number of administered jabs to 6,613,704.According to the Department of Health, of the latest distributed shots, 44,470 people received the Johnson & Johnson, while 170,879 received the Pfizer vaccine.Meanwhile, the Covid-19 death toll has now surpassed the 70,000 mark after 243 more people lost their lives to the respiratory disease.This means that South Africa has now recorded 70,018 fatalities to date.In addition, the country detected 5,683 new Covid-19 cases, said the NICD. This takes the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases to 2,383 490, translating to a 24.3% positivity rate.Gauteng accounted for 1,559 new infections, followed by 1,192 in the Western Cape and 832 in KwaZulu-Natal.The NICD also noted an increase of 479 hospital admissions in the past 24 hours.Read: South Africa to open vaccines for people aged 18 – 34 from SeptemberComments section policy:President announces new restrictions amid warnings surge across continent could be ‘worst yet’First published on Sun 27 Jun 2021 15.24 BSTAuthorities in South Africa have imposed new restrictions in a last ditch attempt to stem a sharp rise in Covid-19 that is ravaging the country’s economic heartland.The wave of infections has been driven by the spread of the more transmissible Delta variant, weak countermeasures and public fatigue with existing restrictions.President Cyril Ramaphosa said all gatherings, indoors and outdoors, would be banned for 14 days, along with the sale of alcohol, dining in restaurants and travel to or from the worst-hit areas of the country. An extended curfew would also be imposed, and schools shut early for holidays.“We have overcome two decisive waves but now we have a new hill to climb, a great challenge, a massive resurgence of infections … a devastating wave,” Ramaphosa said, speaking on national television on Sunday night.South Africa’s rising cases are part of a resurgence across Africa, with a peak expected to exceed that of earlier waves as the continent’s 54 countries struggle to vaccinate even a small percentage of their populations.The World Health Organization (WHO) has repeatedly appealed for vaccines for Africa, saying a fast-surging Covid third wave is outpacing efforts to protect populations, “leaving more and more dangerously exposed”.“The third wave is picking up speed, spreading faster, hitting harder. This is incredibly worrying. With rapidly rising case numbers and increasing reports of serious illness, the latest surge threatens to be Africa’s worst yet,” Dr Matshidiso Moeti, the WHO regional director for Africa, said last week.African countries have recorded 5.4m cases and almost 145,000 deaths, though unreliable data means the true numbers are thought to be much higher.In South Africa’s Gauteng province, the most populous part of the country, Covid patients are waiting for hours, even days, on stretchers in A&E wards before being found a bed, officials said.Unlike past waves, this time the hospital system was not coping, said Dr Angelique Coetzee, the chair of the South African Medical Association.Calling on citizens to comply with social distancing measures, Ramaphosa underlined the increased transmission of the Delta variant and admitted that health systems were “buckling under the strain”.Repeated promises have been made to accelerate the faltering vaccination campaign in South Africa, but only 2.5m have been delivered to a population of 60 million. Alhough the increase in cases in Gauteng has exceeded a severe second wave six months ago, it has not yet reached its peak, experts believe.The rise in infections during the southern hemisphere winter was widely predicted, leading to angry criticism of provincial and national officials. In South Africa, outrage has been fuelled by a series of corruption scandals. The health minister has been suspended pending an investigation into graft allegations.The official death toll from Covid-19 in South Africa is 60,000, though excess mortality statistics suggest nearer 170,000 may have died from the disease since May last year.There has also been widespread criticism of authorities for failing to recruit sufficient extra staff, reopen a main hospital in Gauteng closed after a fire two months ago, or follow advice from health officials to impose stricter restrictions on movement or behaviour. The much-publicised arrival of military doctors has been described by health practitioners as “a very late drop in a very big ocean”.Lucky Mpeko, a director at QRS ambulance services, said hospitals in Gauteng were so full that many patients were being sent to medical facilities hours away in Mpumalanga and North West provinces.“The normal practice is that a patient must be taken to the closest hospital to their home, but that has not been possible because hospitals are full, they do not have beds,” Mpeko said. “Even when you are allowed to bring a patient to a hospital, you will have to queue for two or three hours while they try to find space for your patient.”Cases on the continent have been rising fast since early May. Kenya, Namibia, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo have been badly hit and health systems are close to being overwhelmed.Zambia’s health ministry has reported an unprecedented number of Covid deaths, piling pressure on mortuaries and an already weak health system.With similar trends in Uganda, the health minister, Jane Ruth Aceng, blamed highly infectious variants for the new spread, which she said was different from the second wave, with a large number of young people hospitalised.Dr John Nkengasong, the director of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, said the continent was not winning its battle against the virus. “The third wave has come with the severity that most countries were not prepared for. So the third wave is extremely brutal,” he said during a weekly online briefing.The slow vaccination progress has been blamed on limited availability of shots after western countries bought most of them, poor decision-making and multiple administrative failures.Just over one in 100 people across Africa have been vaccinated, and out of 2.7bn doses administered globally, just under 1.5% have been administered on the continent.Eight African countries have used all the stocks supplied to them by Covax, the UN-backed vaccine-sharing facility, and another 18 are close to exhausting their stocks, the WHO told reporters last week. Dozens more have less than half remaining.Malawi exhausted its stocks in recent days, just as thousands were due their second shot.“The lack of vaccines in a region with high levels of poverty and inequality means many people feel they are just waiting to die,” said Deprose Muchena, a regional director at Amnesty International.But several countries have failed to administer jabs from Covax before their use-by date because of logistical failures and vaccine hesitancy.Ramaphosa warned South Africans against false information on social media and asked them to avoid “spreading panic, fear and confusion” by circulating misleading posts about vaccines.“They are safe, effective and they save lives,” he said.Malawi destroyed almost 20,000 expired AstraZeneca doses in May, while the DRC and South Sudan have returned more than 2m shots to the UN to avoid a similar scenario.With new cases soaring by 25% President Cyril Ramaphosa warns of massive resurgence of infectionsThe health system in Johannesburg, South Africa’s biggest city, is being overwhelmed by a massive wave of infections driven by the Delta variant, the winter in the southern hemisphere and a faltering vaccine campaign.The new variant is now dominant in Africa’s most developed country, where the official death toll is now more than 60,000, though excess mortality statistics suggest more than 170,000 may have died from Covid.Across Africa, the Delta variant is fuelling an aggressive third wave of infections, with case numbers climbing faster than all earlier peaks, according to the World Health Organization.WHO experts warned last week that infections across Africa have increased for six consecutive weeks, up by 25% last week, reaching 202,000 positive cases. South Africa accounted for more than half of Africa’s cases last week, although it is one of the few countries where testing is extensive. On 1 July alone more than 21,000 cases were registered.Authorities in South Africa have been unable to stem the spread of the new variant, only moving to impose new restrictions after a massive wave of infections ravaged the country’s economic heartland.President Cyril Ramaphosa said last week that the country’s health system was “buckling” as he imposed a two-week ban on all gatherings, indoors and outdoors, along with the sale of alcohol and travel to or from the worst hit areas of the country, such as Gauteng, its most populous and economically productive province. An extended curfew was also imposed, and schools shut early for holidays.“We have overcome two decisive waves but now we have a new hill to climb, a great challenge, a massive resurgence of infections… a devastating wave,” he said.Anger and frustration have grown after repeated promises to accelerate the faltering vaccination campaign have been broken. Only three million jabs have been delivered to a population of 60 million. Acting health minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane said that delivery of vaccines would gather pace in coming weeks, with all those over 50, as well as police, teachers and soldiers, being targeted.However, a series of corruption scandals involving Covid spending has undermined trust in the government. The health minister has been suspended pending an investigation into corruption allegations.The surge in infections has laid bare the weakness of the public health services, with hospitals overflowing and shortages of oxygen, but above all a lack of trained personnel. The much-publicised arrival of military doctors has been described by health practitioners as “a very late drop in a very big ocean”.Last Thursday the South African Medical Association threatened to take the government to court because scores of new junior doctors cannot find placements despite staff shortages.The vaccine drive has been halted over weekends and public holidays to rest health workers but also because there is no budget for overtime, officials have admitted.In many parts of the country volunteer organisations are filling gaps. Some patients in Johannesburg who have failed to find a bed on a public ward are being cared for at a makeshift Covid ward set up by a Muslim charity in the city.“We don’t see dead people. The funeral services see dead people. We see death. That’s the difference. We see death happening. We try to get to patients on time but unfortunately we can’t always do that,” said Anees Kara, a volunteer doctor.Studies of blood donors released on Friday have revealed that almost half of the population may have already been infected by the virus, though the third wave appears set to be the worst yet.The WHO has said the speed and scale of Africa’s third wave is unprecedented.“The rampant spread of more contagious variants pushes the threat to Africa up to a whole new level. More transmission means more serious illness and more deaths, so everyone must act now and boost prevention measures to stop an emergency becoming a tragedy,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO’s regional director for Africa.Eight vaccines have been approved for the WHO emergency-use listing, but shipments to Africa have, in effect, dried up. “While supply challenges grind on, dose-sharing can help plug the gap. We are grateful for the pledges made by our international partners, but we need urgent action on allocations. Africa must not be left languishing in the throes of its worst wave yet,” said Moeti.Only 15 million people – 1.2% of the African population – are fully vaccinated.